The 2024 Economic Impact
    of Music in Texas
       January 2025




               Produced by




                 TXP, Inc.
      1310 South 1st Street; Suite 105
           Austin, Texas 78704
              www.txp.com
Overview
Almost five years post-pandemic, music-related activity continues to grow, though ongoing
shifts in the labor market see a lower volume of employment producing a greater level of
overall activity. Specifically, the number of overall jobs directly associated with music in Texas
has stagnated, albeit with the jobs that remain paying higher wages.

For the first time, the impact of music on travel and tourism is included in the analysis, further
completing the picture of the role that music plays in Texas’ economy.

The return on investment associated with economic development is normally a longer-term
payback, as external events tend to drive the fortunes of a regional economy in the near
term. However, the outlook for Texas remains bright, as the strong influx of both firms and
people in the wake of the pandemic remains a positive force. Much of Texas’ future will
depend on what has brought so many here in the recent past: a highly capable workforce,
innovation and entrepreneurship, clusters in knowledge industries, the presence of world-
class research universities and other institutions of higher learning, and public policy that
supports growth and development. Embedded in the above is the interrelationship between
creativity, innovation, and quality of life that forms a substantial piece of the foundation of a
modern economy. Music is an integral part of this equation; this brief analysis updates the
impact of music on the state’s economy completed four times previously, using the same
methodology and sources of data, as well as discussing broad areas of additional influence on
the Texas economy.

Inputs and Methodology Used in the Modeling Process
Inputs
Any effort to measure the role of music in a local economy involves classification decisions by
the analyst, since music does not map directly to standard industrial classification patterns.
For this study, there are three broad categories of activity that comprise the music sector:

    1) Music business (which includes commercial music, music-related media, music
       production, distribution and sales, music industry, tour and recording services,
       performers, and music-related manufacturing, transportation, and retail activity
       (including venues));
    2) Music education (both primary and secondary); and
    3) Music-related tourism.

On the music business side of the equation, this analysis uses the most current edition of the
Texas Music Directory produced by the Texas Music Office as the data source for job
estimates. This information is then combined with wage data from the Quarterly Survey of



                                                     Texas Music Economic Impact | January 2025   1
Employment and Wages (QCEW) maintained by the Texas Workforce Commission to
estimate annual wages for each segment within the broad categories. These annual earnings
estimates are then crossed against data from the 2017 Economic Census to derive estimates
of annual revenue by sector, allowing an overall assessment of the direct “footprint” of
music business in Texas. Music education is based on job counts and QCEW data on wages.
Meanwhile, data on music event ticket sales in Texas is combined with information on
ancillary spending by attendees and shares of attendance by residence, including both
overnight and day-visitors, to develop direct spending estimates. See Table 1 below for the
results.

Table 1: Texas Music Industry 2024 Direct “Footprint” ($Billions)

                                                          Jobs              Earnings            Revenue/Sales
   Music-Related Business                              71,385                 $4.039                     $11.327
   Music-Related Education                             15,447                 $0.842                          N.A
   Music-Related Tourism                                  N.A.                   N.A.                     $1.206


Source: TXP, Inc. Note: Direct jobs, earnings, or top-line revenue/sales can be used individually as inputs into an
input-output analysis outlined below.


Economic Impact Methodology
In an input-output analysis of new economic activity, it is useful to distinguish three types of
expenditure effects: direct, indirect, and induced. Direct effects are production changes
associated with the immediate effects or final demand changes. The payment made by an
out-of-town visitor to a hotel operator visiting for a concert is an example of a direct effect,
as would be the taxi fare the visitor paid to be transported into town from the airport.

Indirect effects are production changes in backward-linked industries caused by the changing
input needs of directly affected industries—typically, additional purchases to produce
additional output. Satisfying the demand for an overnight stay will require the hotel
operator to purchase additional cleaning supplies and services, for example, and the taxi
driver will have to replace the gasoline consumed during the trip from the airport. These
downstream purchases affect the economic status of other local merchants and workers.

Induced effects are the changes in regional household spending patterns caused by changes
in household income generated from the direct and indirect effects. Both the hotel operator
and taxi driver experience increased income from the visitor’s stay, for example, as do the
cleaning supplies outlet and the gas station proprietor. Induced effects capture the way in
which this increased income is in turn spent in the local economy.




                                                                 Texas Music Economic Impact | January 2025           2
Figure 1: The Flow of Economic Impacts

     Direct         +        Indirect          +     Induced            =            Total

Once the ripple effects have been calculated, the results can be presented various ways.
Three of the most common are “Output,” equivalent to sales; “Earnings,” which represents
the compensation to employees/proprietors; and “Employment,” which refers to permanent,
full-time jobs that have been created locally. The interdependence between different
sectors of the economy is reflected in the concept of a “multiplier.” An output multiplier, for
example, divides the total (direct, indirect and induced) effects of an initial spending injection
by the value of that injection—i.e., the direct effect. The higher the multiplier, the greater
the interdependence among different sectors of the economy.

Results
The ripple effects associated with the direct injection outlined in Table One collectively bring
the total impact (including the direct effects) to almost 196,000 permanent jobs, $10.5 billion
in earnings, and $31.7 billion in annual economic activity. The State of Texas also realizes
approximately $564 million in tax revenue from these impacts.

Table 2: Summary of Texas Music Industry 2024 Total Economic Impact ($Billions)
                                        Jobs         Earnings    Revenue/Sales        TX Tax Rev.
   Music-Related Business           145,855           $8.121             $24.706          $0.407
   Music-Related Education            24,476          $1.510                $4.132        $0.076
   Music-Related Tourism              25,648          $0.853                $2.827        $0.081
   Total Annual                     195,979          $10.484             $31.655          $0.564
Source: TXP, Inc.


Conclusion
The figures above show the important role that music plays in Texas’ economy, and the fact
that it, in dollar terms, is at an all-time high. There are many factors that drive economic
growth in Texas, with an exceptional range of activity and opportunity in music and the
creative space clearly a major factor. Texas is a place that appreciates creativity and culture
in a variety of forms, and its incredible diversity of the local scene undoubtedly serves to
both attract and retain talented people. This in turn has a significant impact on business
recruitment, retention, and expansion, as well as local entrepreneurship. Moreover, music is
a crucial element of “Brand Texas” that draws visitors from across the globe, the impact of
which this report documents for the first time. The creativity expressed through music is a
fundamental comparative advantage for Texas—the goal remains to identify the key
investments, policies, and regulatory changes necessary for sustainability and growth.


                                                     Texas Music Economic Impact | January 2025     3
Legal Disclaimer
TXP reserves the right to make changes, corrections, and/or improvements at any time and
without notice. In addition, TXP disclaims any and all liability for damages incurred directly or
indirectly as a result of errors, omissions, or discrepancies. TXP disclaims any liability due to
errors, omissions, or discrepancies made by third parties whose material TXP relied on in
good faith to produce the report.

Any statements involving matters of opinion or estimates, whether or not so expressly
stated, are set forth as such and not as representations of fact, and no representation is
made that such opinions or estimates will be realized. The information and expressions of
opinion contained herein are subject to change without notice, and shall not, under any
circumstances, create any implications that there has been no change or updates.




                                                     Texas Music Economic Impact | January 2025   4
