City of Austin
Office of the City Auditor


Special Report

Economic Development Department
Culture and Arts Funding
October 2024




We researched information to answer several questions about cultural arts grant funding
and eligibility criteria in Austin. In typical years, most revenues used for cultural arts come
from hotel occupancy taxes. In recent years, large infusions of City and federal money from
programs initiated during the COVID-19 pandemic were allocated to fund cultural arts
programs. The City collects a variety of information about applicants for funding, but did not
collect some information consistently. We also looked at culture and arts programs in other
cities. They appear similar, but most are managed through a separate department or office.
The City of Austin has not made progress in creating a separate Department of Arts, Culture
and Creativity.
  Contents                             Objective & Background
                                       What We Learned
                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                    3
                                       Appendices                                                                  13
                                       Why We Did This Report, Scope, & Methodology                                17

                                       Cover: Reflect and Resound by Virginia Fleck, located in the daycare facility
                                       of Austin’s Women and Children’s Shelter



  Objective                            The objective of this special request was to provide the following
                                       information requested by the City Council for fiscal years 2018 through
                                       2023 (except for question six):

                                       •   What are the revenues, expenditures, and administrative costs related
                                           to cultural arts funding?
                                       •   What are eligible expenses and criteria for cultural arts funds under
                                           federal and state law as well as City Code?
                                       •   What information does the City of Austin collect about applicants for
                                           cultural arts grant funding? What is the profile of applicants for this
                                           funding based on available information?
                                       •   What are the major changes in the City’s cultural arts program?
                                       •   What progress has City management made towards the CreateAustin
                                           Plan’s recommendation to establish a Department of Arts, Cultural and
                                           Creativity?
                                       •   Based on the current year, how do cultural arts grant-making programs
                                           in other cities compare to Austin’s, including their administrative
                                           structure, staffing, and funding?



  Background                           The arts, culture, and creativity are valued as vital contributors to Austin’s
                                       character, quality of life, and economy. Through culture and arts funding,
                                       the City of Austin provides support annually to local artists, area non-profit
                                       arts organizations, and creative entrepreneurs.

                                       The funding for culture and arts programs typically comes from the City’s
                                       Hotel Occupancy Tax (HOT) revenue. According to City Code, the City
                                       allocates 15% of the City’s HOT revenue to support arts and cultural
                                       organizations. Recipients of this funding run projects and activities in
                                       Austin aimed at promoting tourism and the convention and hotel industry
                                       through the encouragement, promotion, improvement, application, and
                                       exhibition of the arts.

                                       The Cultural Arts Division within the City’s Economic Development
                                       Department (EDD) oversees the City’s cultural arts funding. The City
                                       contracted with the Long Center and the Better Business Bureau of Austin,
                                       Texas, as third-party administrators for processing the grant agreements
                                       and payments.




Economic Development Department Culture and Arts Funding 2                                      Office of the City Auditor
  What We Learned
  Summary                              We researched information to answer several questions about cultural
                                       arts grant funding and eligibility criteria in Austin. In typical years, most
                                       revenues used for cultural arts come from hotel occupancy taxes. In recent
                                       years, large infusions of City and federal money from programs initiated
                                       during the COVID-19 pandemic were allocated to fund cultural arts
                                       programs. The City collects a variety of information about applicants for
                                       funding, but did not collect some information consistently. We also looked
                                       at culture and arts programs in other cities. They appear similar, but most
                                       are managed through a separate department or office. The City of Austin
                                       has not made progress in creating a separate Department of Arts, Culture
                                       and Creativity.



  Question 1                           Cultural arts funding revenues: According to information provided by
                                       EDD staff, the annual revenue for fiscal years 2018 through 2023 ranged
  What are the revenues,               between about $9 million and $27 million. Most revenues for the cultural
  expenditures, and                    arts came from Hotel Occupancy Tax (HOT), however, large infusions of
                                       City and federal money initiated during the COVID-19 pandemic were
  administrative costs
                                       allocated to fund these programs, as well. In typical years, revenue would
  related to cultural arts             come mainly from HOT and a very small amount would come from interest
  funding?                             income.

                                       In 2021, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
                                       Act provided $11.3 million for cultural funding. From those funds, $6.3
                                       million went to fund culture and arts non-profits, and $5 million funded
                                       mini-grants to creative sector workers and music disaster relief. These
                                       funds were administered through a third-party vendor, the Better Business
                                       Bureau of Austin, Texas.

                                       In 2022, the American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) brought $12 million to
                                       the City to use for other culture and arts relief. From those funds, $6
                                       million went to the arts, $2 million to arts non-profit relief, and $4 million
                                       to music.1 The ARPA funding was administered by two entities, the Long
                                       Center and the Better Business Bureau of Austin, Texas.

                                       In addition to emergency funds from federal sources, culture and arts
                                       programs received funding from City sources during the pandemic.
                                       In 2022, cultural programs received a total of $5.8 million from the
                                       General Fund Budget Stabilization Reserve to shore up losses from the
                                       COVID-19 pandemic. From those funds, $4.8 million went to cultural arts
                                       programming and $1 million went to provide pandemic relief to culture
                                       and arts non-profits.

                                       Before the pandemic, EDD had been allocating grant funding based on
                                       projected earnings from HOT. However, the infusion of federal funding in
                                       2021 and 2022 allowed them to move to funding based on the prior year’s
                                       HOT earnings instead of the current year’s projected earnings.

                                       1
                                         For the purposes of this report, we did not look at funding for music or music disaster
                                       relief.

Economic Development Department Culture and Arts Funding 3                                                 Office of the City Auditor
                                           Exhibit 1: Cultural arts revenues by source for fiscal years 2018 – 2023




                                       Note: The years indicate the fiscal year budget in which the funding was included.
                                       Source: Office of the City Auditor (OCA) analysis of revenue data provided by EDD, June 2024

                                       Cultural arts expenditures: According to information provided by EDD
                                       staff, expenditures for fiscal years 2018 through 2023 ranged between
                                       about $9 million and $16 million. Before the pandemic, expenditures for
                                       cultural arts came mainly from the Cultural Arts Fund which was funded by
                                       HOT revenues and a small amount of interest income.

                                       While City Council appropriated $4.8 million from the Budget Stabilization
                                       Reserve to the Cultural Arts Fund to account for HOT revenue losses, only
                                       $1.18 million was paid out in 2022, with $500,000 coming from the $4.8
                                       million appropriation. This $500,000 was approved by the City Council to
                                       go towards culture and arts non-profit relief grants. An additional $1
                                       million from the General Fund Budget Stabilization Reserve was paid from
                                       the EDD operating fund and used to provide additional culture and arts
                                       non-profit relief. Also, the 2022 expenditures from CARES and ARPA
                                       funding were distributed to qualifying applicants through third-party
                                       administrators, the Long Center and the Better Business Bureau of Austin,
                                       Texas.
                                       Exhibit 2: Cultural arts expenditures by source for fiscal years 2018 – 2023




                                       Source: OCA analysis of expenditure data provided by EDD, June 2024




Economic Development Department Culture and Arts Funding 4                                                      Office of the City Auditor
                                        Cultural arts administrative costs: According to information provided by
                                        EDD staff, administrative costs for fiscal years 2018 through 2023 ranged
                                        between 4.9% and 8.4% of the total expenditures shown in Exhibit 2.
                                        Most of the administrative costs were for EDD staff salaries. The rest went
   The TEMPO Program provides           to other non-grant expenses like marketing, software licenses, facility
   funding to local artists for         maintenance, the PARD Artist Access program, and the TEMPO program.
   temporary public art installations
                                        Also, the third-party administrators of ARPA and CARES funding receive a
   on City-owned property.
                                        4.5% fee to administer the funds. A full list of administrative costs can be
                                        found in Appendix A.



  Question 2                            As noted above, most of the funding for the City’s cultural arts comes from
                                        the City’s HOT revenue. The City of Austin Code states that the City’s HOT
  What are eligible                     revenue may be used only as provided by Texas State law.
  expenses and criteria for              The state of Texas allows cities to use revenue from HOT to promote
  cultural arts funds under             culture and art. Texas State Code, Section 351.101, establishes a two-part
  federal and state law as              test that cities must meet for any expenditures of HOT revenue collected:
  well as City Code?                    1. Every expenditure must directly enhance and promote tourism and the
                                           convention and hotel industry. However, the state does not provide
                                           a formula for determining the level of impact an event must have to
                                           satisfy this requirement.

                                        2. Every expenditure must fit into one of the statutorily authorized
                                           categories for expenditure of local HOT revenues. One of those
                                           categories is “[e]xpenditures that promote cultural and fine arts.”
                                           However, to meet the two-part test, these expenditures must also
                                           directly promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry.

                                        State law and City Code provide specific examples of allowed
                                        expenses related to the encouragement, promotion, improvement, and
                                        encouragement of arts. These include expenses for “instrumental and
                                        vocal music, dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design
                                        and allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts,
                                        motion pictures, radio, television, tape and sound recording, and other
                                        arts related to the presentation, performance, execution, and exhibition of
                                        these major art forms.”

                                        The City of Austin also established a detailed list of allowed expenses for
                                        each of its current culture and arts programs (Thrive, Nexus, and Elevate).
                                        Generally, allowable expenses are similar across the three programs. They
                                        include costs incurred in the preparation and implementation of cultural
                                        activities that are open to and marketed to tourists including:

                                        • Administrative expenses &          • Insurance costs
                                          artist fees                        • Fiscal sponsor fees, if applicable, &
                                        • Travel for visiting artists          other contract management costs
                                        • Space and equipment rentals        • Licensing fees or subscriptions
                                        • Production costs                     for software needed for the
                                        • Supplies and materials               implementation of contracted
                                        • Marketing and promotion              activities
                                          expenses


Economic Development Department Culture and Arts Funding 5                                      Office of the City Auditor
                                       Allowable expenses that are unique for the Thrive program include:

                                       •    Capital expenditures, which includes, but are not limited to, the
                                            purchase, repair, or renovation of equipment or property like speaker
                                            systems, theater seats, and artwork. However, the City requires any
                                            single capital expenditure over $2,000 to be pre-approved by a City
                                            staff contract administrator.

                                       •    Costs related to improving the organization’s ability to produce cultural
                                            events.

                                       Eligible expenses and criteria for grant-funded programs: The City of
                                       Austin used money from a federal National Endowment for the Arts (NEA)
                                       grant for local arts agencies to create a sub-granting program called the
                                       Arts Education Relief Grant. In 2023, the City received approximately
                                       $500,000 from this grant. Exhibit 3 shows both the federal eligibility
                                       criteria for the City to receive these funds as well as the City’s criteria for
                                       non-profits to apply for the Arts Education Relief Grant funding.
                                                     Exhibit 3: Federal and City of Austin eligibility criteria
                                                                  for NEA-funded grant money

                                                       NEA criteria for                            City of Austin criteria for
                                                      local art agencies                          Arts Education Relief Grant
                                        •    Arts-focused non-profit,                         Arts education-focused 501(c)
                                             tax-exempt 501(c)(3)                             (3) non-profit organizations
                                             organizations                                    providing arts education services:
                                        •    Units of state or local                          • Primarily serve participants
                                             government                                           from early childhood through
                                        •    Federally-recognized tribal                          18 years
                                             communities or tribes                            • Must be located and operating
                                        •    Applicants may be arts                               in the Austin metropolitan
                                             organizations, local arts                            statistical area
                                             agencies, arts service                           • Must have at least a one-year
                                             organizations, local education                       operating history
                                             agencies, and other                              • Majority of applicant’s
                                             organizations that can help                          activities must be within the
                                             advance the NEA’s goals                              Austin city limits

                                       Source: OCA analysis of federal and City requirements for use of the Arts Education Relief Grant, June
                                       2024


                                       The City established eligibility criteria for each of its 2023 culture and
                                       arts programs (Thrive, Nexus, Elevate, and Arts Education Relief Grant).
                                       Appendix B shows a summary of the eligibility criteria for each of the
                                       programs.




Economic Development Department Culture and Arts Funding 6                                                        Office of the City Auditor
  Question 3                           Economic Development Department staff collect both personal and
                                       organizational information from the culture and arts program applicants
  What information                     as shown in the bulleted list. The information collected is generally similar
  does the City of Austin              across the programs with a few exceptions.
  collect about applicants             •   Applicant name, contact information, race/ethnicity, gender, and council
  for cultural arts grant                  district
  funding? What is the                 •   Business structure including whether the organization is a non-profit,
  profile of applicants for                creative business, or individual artist
  this funding based on                •   Organization/business mission, vision, and address
  available information?
                                       •   Composition of leadership based on race/ethnicity and gender

                                       •   Current City funding

                                       •   Fiscal sponsor

                                       •   Operating budget and how the applicant intends to use the awarded
                                           funds

                                       •   Artistic discipline/experience

                                       •   Primary production history and the proposed public activities

                                       •   Community impact (usually a short narrative about the proposed
                                           project)

                                       •   How the applicant plans to market the proposed activities

                                       •   Number of members of the disability community, and number of
                                           members of LGBTQIA+ community in leadership*

                                       •   Specialized language access accommodations or programming
                                           for non-English speaking communities, and accommodations for
                                           individuals with disabilities*

                                       * The City did not consistently collect this information during fiscal years
                                       2018 through 2021

                                       Some information is collected only from a subsection of programs. For
                                       example, only Thrive program applicants are required to provide the
                                       number of people employed by the applicant (both permanent and
                                       contract employees). Also, IRS information is collected for non-profits
                                       only. Appendix C shows more detail of information that was consistently
                                       tracked for 2023 program participants.




Economic Development Department Culture and Arts Funding 7                                      Office of the City Auditor
   Question 4                                     From fiscal years 2018 to 2023, City managaement made several key
                                                  changes to its culture and arts funding program. Changes were made to
   What are the major                             the programs offered, eligibility requirements, funding amounts and
   changes in the City of                         approach, and application review and scoring processes.
   Austin’s cultural arts                                       Exhibit 4: City management made key changes to the
   program?                                                         culture and arts funding program since 2018
                                                                                            Based on a 2022 cultural funding review, the City:
                        Reduced organizational funding                                         -Made major changes to programs offered,
                        due to increased participation                                         funding award amounts and funding cycles,
                        and limited funding                                                    review of applications and scoring processes,
                                                                                               and insurance and eligibility requirements
                                                                                                -Switched basis for funding from projected
                                                                                               HOT funds to actual HOT funds collected

                                2018                                    2020
                                                    2019                                    2021                                   2023
                                                                                                                2022

                         The City launched Strategic
                         Direction 2023, reinforcing an              Significant City and federal
                         approach to lead with a lens of             money from programs                    EDD made program changes
                         racial equity and healing, which            initiated during the COVID-            to comply with increased risks
                         EDD adopted to manage the                   19 pandemic were allocated             to race-led equity programs
                         programs*                                   to fund cultural arts


                      * For example, EDD started prioritizing organizations that served communities at immediate risk of cultural erasure and
                      displacement, and those that represented communities that experienced other forms of organizational marginalization.
                      Source: OCA analysis of EDD culture and arts funding reports, May 2024

                                                  Specific changes made following the City’s 2022 Cultural Funding Review
                                                  Process: In 2022, City staff reviewed and restructured the cultural funding
                                                  process, replacing the old culture and arts programs (Community
EDD staff noted community and                     Initiatives, Core, Cultural Heritage Festivals, and Capacity Building) with
stakeholder engagement informed                   three new pilot programs (Nexus, Thrive, and Elevate). These new pilot
the changes made through this review              programs were launched in fiscal year 2023. The City contracted with a
process.                                          third-party administrator for processing grant agreements and payments
                                                  for these programs. Staff stated the City widened its focus to include
                                                  sustainability, not just growth. Also, they changed other aspects of the
                                                  program including funding, eligibility requirements, and the panel review
                                                  process. Exhibits 5 and 6 show funding and eligibility changes.
                                                                  Exhibit 5: Funding changes across all pilot programs
                                                                  Initial process                                    Changes made
                                                   Matching funding requirement                        Requirement removed for all programs
Based on the City’s cultural funding
                                                   Fiscal sponsorship was mandatory for
guidelines, a “fiscal sponsor” is a                                                                    Requirement removed for all programs
                                                   some programs
non-profit corporation with a 501(c)
status who applies for financial support           Program awards based on applicant’s
                                                                                                       Requirement removed for all programs
on behalf of another organization                  existing budget
or individual. This enables the other              The City used projected HOT revenue                 The City used actual HOT revenue to
organization or individual to receive the          to determine program awards                         determine program awards
benefits of tax-exempt status
                                                   The City funded all applicants scoring              The City funded the highest-scoring
                                                   75 or higher on a 100-point scale                   applications until all funds exhausted
                                                  Source: OCA analysis of information provided by EDD staff, May 2024


Economic Development Department Culture and Arts Funding 8                                                                   Office of the City Auditor
                                                Exhibit 6: Applicant eligibility changes across all pilot programs
                                                     Initial process                        Changes made
                                                                                         Eligibility expanded to applicants
                                           Eligibility limited to applicants             from the Austin/Round Rock
                                           in Austin or the extra-territorial            Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA),
                                           jurisdiction (ETJ)                            but activities receiving funding must
                                                                                         take place within the city of Austin
                                           Non-arts programs were eligible to Non-arts programs are not eligible
                                           participate in the programs        to participate in the programs
                                                                                         Eligibility expanded to any for-profit
                                           Individual artists and arts
                                                                                         business structure with a budget of
                                           collectives (without 501(c) status)
                                                                                         $500,000 or less (for Elevate) and
                                           were eligible
                                                                                         $150,000 or less (for Nexus)
                                           Program applications only          Program applications accepted in
                                           accepted in one language (English) non-English languages
                                       Source: OCA analysis of information provided by EDD staff, May 2024


                                       Changes related to application panel review process: City management
                                       made some changes aimed at improving the applicant panel review
                                       process. For example, the City:
                                       •      Added formal training components for reviewers, including equity and
                                              unconscious bias training, and technical training on how to use the
                                              online application system
                                       •      Clarified the panel composition and selection process
                                       •      Disallowed applicant interaction with the panel
                                       •      Made panels virtual instead of in-person
                                       •      Video-recorded panel meetings as opposed to audio-recorded
                                       •      Added Spanish interpreters
                                       •      Added a two-round panel process for fiscal year 20232

                                       Other program-specific changes: For Nexus applicants, City management
                                       waived the insurance requirements. Also, Thrive participants were allowed
                                       to spend awarded funds on capital expenditures. However, participants
                                       must obtain pre-approval from an EDD program staff member for any
                                       capital expenses over $2,000.




                                       2
                                           According to EDD staff, this will not be utilized in future years.



Economic Development Department Culture and Arts Funding 9                                                      Office of the City Auditor
  Question 5                                  In 2006, the City of Austin undertook the CreateAustin cultural planning
                                              process with community stakeholders to “identify Austin’s creative
  What progress has City                      assets and challenges, define goals, and establish recommendations
  management made                             to invigorate Austin’s ‘culture of creativity’ to the year 2017.” In 2010,
  towards the CreateAustin                    Council endorsed the CreateAustin Cultural Master Plan (Plan), in principle.
                                              The plan recommended creating a City department for arts and culture
  Plan’s recommendation                       and consolidating all arts, culture, music, and film activities into that
  to establish a Department                   department. The Plan notes that activities and funds were spread across
  of Arts, Cultural and                       departments creating a lack of focus, missed opportunities for leveraging
  Creativity?                                 City resources, and a lack of a unified vision and coordination. The Plan
                                              indicated that creating the department would allow the City to leverage
                                              available resources and raise the significance of arts and culture in Austin.

                                              When endorsing the Plan, Council Members gave three directives to
                                              the City Manager, one of which was to “[d]irect City staff to continue to
                                              explore the coordination of creative enterprise services, programs and
                                              resources into an interdisciplinary staff team within the City to ensure
                                              effective interdepartmental communication and collaboration of services
                                              between the respective creative industries.” This directive followed a 2009
                                              feasibility study by City Manager’s Office staff to explore the creation of
                                              a new department of Arts and Culture. This study did not recommend
                                              creating a separate department.

                                              EDD staff said that the department has not received an explicit directive
                                              to create a separate new department of arts and culture. They noted that
                                              there have been many one-on-one discussions between EDD management
                                              and other key stakeholders including City Council offices, Arts Commission,
                                              and City Manager’s Office. Staff also said that EDD has previously asked
                                              City management if there is interest in moving arts and culture out of EDD,
                                              but the answer has always been “no.”
                       Exhibit 7: Timeline of City actions related to CreateAustin’s recommendation to create a
                                               Department of Arts, Culture and Creativity




                   * The feasibility study report recommended creating a separate division within the Economic Growth and Redevelopment Services
                   Office (now EDD) emphasizing the music division alongside the Arts Culture and Creativity Division.
                   Source: OCA analysis of City documents and information obtained from EDD staff, April 2024



Economic Development Department Culture and Arts Funding 10                                                           Office of the City Auditor
  Question 6                           We surveyed culture and arts programs in 10 cities (Dallas, El Paso, Fort
                                       Worth, Houston, and San Antonio in Texas as well as Denver, Phoenix,
  Based on the current                 San Diego, San Jose, and Seattle) to collect information about program
  year, how do cultural arts           attributes including administrative structure, funding, and staffing.
  grant-making programs                Programs were similar, but some differed in terms of who manages culture
                                       and arts operations as well as how they are staffed and funded.
  in other cities compare to
  Austin’s, including their            Administrative structure: In 8 of 11 cities, culture and arts programs are
  administrative structure,            managed through separate departments or offices that have a sole focus
                                       on culture and arts. In Austin, the program is managed by the Cultural
  staffing, and funding?               Arts Division within the Economic Development Department. In Houston,
                                       the program is a separate office in the Mayor’s Office. This program also
                                       works with a third-party partner who has their own staffing resources who
                                       help to manage grants and public art programs. In San Jose, the program
                                       is managed by a division of their Office of Economic Development and
                                       Cultural Affairs (located within the City Manager’s office). All the cities
                                       have an Arts Commission or board that acts as an advisory body to support
                                       the City Council.

                                       In Austin and 4 other cities (San Antonio, Denver, San Diego, and San
                                       Jose), other entities such as the Parks, Library, and Aviation departments
                                       also manage various programs that have cultural impacts on their cities.

                                       Staffing: Staffing varied among the cities. In Austin and 5 cities, staffing
                                       ranged between 8 and 26 staff members (FTEs). Another 5 cities had at
                                       least 45 FTEs. However, in those cities, the culture and arts managing
                                       entities also oversee cultural facilities.

                                       Funding: We mainly looked at funding flowing through the cities and
                                       excluded any other funding that culture and arts organizations received
                                       directly from other sources. All the cities have dedicated funding sources
                                       that support their programs. The most common source of funding is HOT
                                       revenue. Another common funding source is the general fund.

                                       See Exhibit 8 for more detailed information about the culture and arts
                                       program attributes among the cities we reviewed.




Economic Development Department Culture and Arts Funding 11                                      Office of the City Auditor
                                                                 Exhibit 8: Culture and arts programs in Austin and other cities
            City                            Managing entity                            FTEs                                         Key source of funding
                                                                                                   •   Hotel Occupancy Tax
                                                                                                   •   2% Ordinance of COA Capital Improvement Project (CIP)
                            Cultural Arts Division within the
    Austin (TX)                                                                         18         •   General Fund – Budget Stabilization Reserve
                            Economic Development Department
                                                                                                   •   Pandemic relief funding - ARPA and CARES (One-time funding source)
                                                                                                   •   Federal Grant - National Endowment for the Arts (One-time funding source)
                                                                                                   •   Hotel Occupancy Tax
    Dallas (TX)             Office of Arts & Culture*                                   56         •   Capital Bond Program Reimbursement
                                                                                                   •   Municipal Radio Reimbursement
                            El Paso Museums and Cultural Affairs                                   •   Hotel Occupancy Tax
    El Paso (TX)                                                                       51.5
                            Department**                                                           •   General Fund
    Fort Worth              Arts Council of Fort Worth and Tarrant
                                                                                        14         •   General Fund
    (TX)                    County, d/b/a Arts Fort Worth
                                                                                                   •   Hotel Occupancy Tax
    Houston (TX)            Mayor's Office of Cultural Affairs                          26
                                                                                                   •   General Fund
    San Antonio                                                                                    •   Hotel Occupancy Tax
                            Department of Arts & Culture                                24
    (TX)                                                                                           •   Arts and Entertainment Fund
    Denver (CO)             Denver Arts and Venues***                                   93         •   Facility Operations (100%)

                                                                                                   •   General Fund
                            City of Phoenix Arts and Culture
    Phoenix (AZ)                                                                        28         •   National Endowment for the Arts Grants
                            Department
                                                                                                   •   Percent-For-Art CIP Budget
                                                                                                   •   Hotel Occupancy Tax
    San Diego (CA) Department of Cultural Affairs                                        8         •   CIP and Developer fees
                                                                                                   •   General Fund
                                                                                                   •   Transient Occupancy Tax (Hotel Tax)
                            San Jose Office of Cultural Affairs,
                                                                                                   •   General Fund
                            a division of the Office of Economic
    San Jose (CA)                                                                       13         •   Citywide Operation and Maintenance Funds for City-owned Cultural Facilities
                            Development and Cultural Affairs, an
                                                                                                   •   Percent-for-Art Fund (1% on City CIP)
                            office within the City Manager’s Office
                                                                                                   •   Contributed Grant Funds
                                                                                                   •   Seattle Admissions Tax (5% Admissions Tax)
    Seattle (WA)            Office of Arts & Culture                                   45.3
                                                                                                   •   City Light – 1% for Art Fund
   * The Dallas Office of Arts and Culture is the custodian of 19 city-owned cultural facilities
   ** The El Paso Museums and Cultural Affairs Department oversees City museums
   *** Denver Arts and Venues manages some cultural facilities
   Source: OCA analysis of cultural arts survey responses from other cities, May 2024


Economic Development Department Culture and Arts Funding                                                   12                                                      Office of the City Auditor
Appendix A - Program and administration expenses for fiscal years 2018 – 2023




     Notes: Values were rounded to the nearest dollar which caused total amounts to be off by a dollar or two in some instances
            EDD staff noted the TEMPO amount will increase in 2024 due to a contract with The Trail Conservancy to manage that program




Economic Development Department Culture and Arts Funding                                           13                                    Office of the City Auditor
Appendix B: Key eligibility criteria for each of the four City’s current arts & culture programs
    Category                           ELEVATE Grant                                     NEXUS Grant                    THRIVE Grant                     NEA*
                       An Incorporated, tax exempt, 501(c)
                       arts organization                                                                                                       This program funds
                                                                                A 501(c) non-profit arts          501(c) non-profit arts
                       A non-501 (c) arts organization (but                                                                                    non-profit arts education
                                                                                organization                      organization
                       registered as a non-profit with the                                                                                     providers
                       Texas Secretary of State Office)
                       Creative businesses with an annual
 Applicant                                                                      A creative business
                       operating budget $500,000 or less
 Type
                       An individual aged 18 or older          An individual aged 18 or older
                       with an annual operating budget         (may apply directly or with a
                       $500,000 or less                        fiscal sponsor)
                                                               Applicant’s most recently
                       Individual artists with an annual
                                                               completed fiscal year budget is
                       operating budget $500,000 or less
                                                               $150,000 or less
                                                               Applicants who have not already                    Applicants must not be
                       Applicants must not be receiving City received or are not currently                        receiving City funding for
 Current City
                       funding for the same activities in the receiving City funding for the                      the same activities in the
 Support
                       fiscal year in which they are applying same activities in the fiscal year                  fiscal year in which they
                                                               in which they are applying                         are applying
                       One-year of operating history in                                                           A minimum of 5 years         One year of operating
                                                               One year of operating history in
                       the cultural sector in the Austin                                                          of operating history in      history in the Austin
                                                               the Austin MSA
                       metropolitan statistical area                                                              Austin                       MSA
                       Produce public arts/culture activities,
                       within the Austin 10-1 districts and
 Production
                       extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ)
 History
                                                                                                                  51% or more of the
                                                                                                                                               Majority of applicant’s
                       51% or more of the application’s                         51% or more of the applicant’s    applicant’s creative
                                                                                                                                               activities must be within
                       creative production is within the                        creative production is within the production is within the
                                                                                                                                               the Austin 10-1 districts
                       Austin 10-1 districts or ETJ                             Austin 10-1 districts or ETJ      Austin 10-1 districts or
                                                                                                                                               or ETJ
                                                                                                                  ETJ
                       Applicant’s address must be in the                       Applicant’s address must be in    Applicant’s address must     Applicant’s address must
 Geographical
                       Austin MSA                                               the Austin MSA                    be in the Austin MSA         be in the Austin MSA
* The NEA grant was from a one-time funding source and is not a recurring program
Source: OCA analysis of the City of Austin Program guidelines, April 2024


Economic Development Department Culture and Arts Funding                                        14                                                  Office of the City Auditor
  Appendix C - Profile of applicants who received funding through
  the City’s Fiscal Year 2023 Cultural Arts Program

  Participants
  In fiscal year 2023 many people and organizations received funding through the City’s cultural arts program.

      Program             Elevate            Thrive              NEA
   Participants       199               36                19


  Participants by business structure
  Overall, non-profits accounted for most program participants followed by individual participants. Only
  non-profits were awarded funding through the Thrive and NEA programs.

                 Participant                 Elevate    Thrive      NEA
   Corporation                                 3%
   Individual                                 12%
   LLC                                        12%
   Non-profit                                 63%       100%        100%
   Not a legally-formed organization           4%
   Partnership                                 1%
   S-Corp                                      1%
   Sole Proprietorship                         4%


  Participants by artistic discipline
  Overall, the Multidisciplinary, Music, Arts Education, and Theater/Opera/Music Theater disciplines had the
  highest number of participants. The Design Arts and Arts/Music Therapy disciplines had the lowest number of
  participants.




                                             Program Participants



Economic Development Department Culture and Arts Funding 15                                   Office of the City Auditor
  Appendix C - Profile of applicants who received funding through
  the City’s Fiscal Year 2023 Cultural Arts Program
  Elevate, Thrive, and NEA program participants by Council district

  Overall, Council districts three, one, nine, and four had the highest number of program participants that
  received funding through cultural arts programs.




                                                               Program Participants

  Source: OCA analysis of the City’s Elevate, Thrive, and NEA cultural arts program reports, April 2024




Economic Development Department Culture and Arts Funding 16                                               Office of the City Auditor
  Why We Did This                      This report responds to a request from Council Members Zohaib “Zo”
                                       Qadri, Vanessa Fuentes, Ryan Alter, José Velásquez, and Leslie Pool.
  Report                               The request aimed to understand the City’s culture and arts funding
                                       process and activities including revenues and expenditures, eligible
                                       expenses and criteria, information collected about applicants, changes
                                       in the cultural arts program, and how the city’s cultural arts program
                                       compares to those in other cities.



  Scope                                The project scope included the City’s culture and arts funding process and
                                       activities during fiscal years 2018 through 2023. The scope also included
                                       identifying and surveying other cities with culture and arts programs.

                                       Data Reliability
                                       Question 1 – Revenue and expenditures: Some of the data and expense
                                       summaries EDD staff provided included errors and inconsistencies. For
                                       example, some values were repeated, and some totals were incorrect. We
                                       reviewed and corrected identified errors with EDD. However, this indicates
                                       there may be an issue with data reliability or an inadequate internal
                                       tracking system.

                                       Question 3 and Appendix C – Profile of program applicants: We did not include
                                       profile information for all programs. Based on the records EDD staff
                                       provided, we noted some information was not complete or consistently
                                       tracked.



  Methodology                          To complete this special request, we performed the following steps:

                                       •   interviewed staff from the Economic Development and Law
                                           Departments, culture and arts programs in other cities; and the Vice
                                           Chair of the Austin Arts Commission.
                                       •   surveyed culture and arts programs in 10 other cities including Dallas,
                                           El Paso, Fort Worth, Houston, and San Antonio in Texas as well as
                                           Denver, Phoenix, San Diego, San Jose, and Seattle
                                       •   reviewed State of Texas and City of Austin rules and regulations about
                                           eligible expenses and criteria for cultural arts funding
                                       •   reviewed and analyzed data, reports, and presentations generated by
                                           the Economic Development Department
                                       •   reviewed and analyzed survey information from other cities (Dallas,
                                           El Paso, Fort Worth, Houston, and San Antonio in Texas as well as
                                           Denver, Phoenix, San Diego, San Jose, and Seattle)



  Project Type                         This project is not considered an audit. However, this project was
                                       conducted in accordance with the ethics, independence, competency, and
                                       quality provisions of the Government Auditing Standards.




Economic Development Department Culture and Arts Funding 17                                    Office of the City Auditor
The Office of the City Auditor was created by the Austin City
Charter as an independent office reporting to City Council to
help establish accountability and improve City services. Special
requests are designed to answer specific questions to assist
Council in decision-making. We do not draw conclusions or make
recommendations in these reports.




Team
Patrick Johnson, Audit Manager
Henry Katumwa, Auditor-in-Charge
Mariel Dempster


City Auditor
Corrie Stokes


Deputy City Auditor
Jason Hadavi


Office of the City Auditor
phone: (512) 974-2805
email: AustinAuditor@austintexas.gov
website: http://www.austintexas.gov/auditor

   AustinAuditor
   @AustinAuditor


Copies of our audit reports are available at
http://www.austintexas.gov/page/audit-reports




                      Alternate formats available upon request
