                                                                                                                            RESOURCES
                                                                                                                            FOR GRANT
                                                                                                                            APPLICANTS




            Austin Live Music Fund
            Application Breakdown
                CONTENTS
                Before You Apply – FAQ ..................................................................................................... 2
                Austin Live Music Fund Eligibility Quiz ................................................................................... 4
                How is the Application Set Up? Section by Section Breakdown ................................................... 8
                Fillable Application Templates............................................................................................ 10
                Required Supporting Documentation .................................................................................... 11


            The Austin Live Music Fund encourages, promotes, improves, and showcases Austin’s diverse music industry through
            supporting a wide array of activities marketed to visiting and potential tourists and conventions delegates, including
            live and online events open to the public; studio, video and merchandise production; promotional tours outside of
            Austin; broadcasting; and, marketing and promotional campaigns.

            This guide will walk you through the application. Review the complete Austin Live Music Fund Guidelines developed
            by the City of Austin’s Music and Entertainment Division for detailed information on eligibility requirements, review
            processes, and eligible grant expenses. Application assistance resources include the following:
            •   RSVP for one of the Virtual Workshop and Q&A Sessions happening 1 p.m. – 2:30 p.m. on Tuesday, May 28
                and Tuesday, June 4
            •   JOIN one of the Virtual Open OfÏce Hours (passcode 289843) happening 1 p.m. – 3 p.m. on Tuesday, June 11
                and Tuesday, June 18
            •   For application assistance, including with application questions and program guidelines, contact Create Austin
                at The Long Center at applicationhelp@thelongcenter.org or by phone at 512-XXXXXXX
            •   For application technical support, including creating or logging into your Submittable application account and
                other online technical issues, refer to the Submittable Applicant and Technical Support Guide or contact
                Create Austin at The Long Center at CityofAustinGrants@thelongcenter.org
            •   Visit Create Austin’s Live Music Fund Webpage for additional helpful resources to support your application

.




    .




        .




    .
Before You Apply – FAQ
Is the Austin Live Music Fund the right grant for me?
When applying for a City of Austin cultural funding grant, it’s important to consider the scope of your
activity, the size of your organization, your particular creative industry, the timing of your activity, and
whether that timing fits within a specific grant window. The Music and Entertainment Division’s website
has the most comprehensive information about applicant eligibility for the Austin Live Music Fund.

We encourage people to apply for the grant that best suits their needs. If you have more questions on this
topic, you can email applicationhelp@thelongcenter.org. Our Application Assistance team will redirect you
to the right City staff member.

I don’t know if I will need Insurance for my grant funded activities and I want to plan
ahead, what should I do?
For the Austin Live Music Fund, a Certificate of Insurance (COI) is required in the following cases:

•   Professional Musicians & Independent Promoters: Certificate of “Event Insurance” for discrete
    public events. This does not include ‘gigging’ at commercial live music venues. Those activities will
    already be covered under the venue’s general insurance policy.
•   Activity Related Transportation: Valid driver’s license and current auto-insurance for transportation
    of event-related equipment.

Create Austin has developed an Insurance Quiz that you may take at any time, regardless of whether you
are an applicant or an awardee. This quiz provides specific insurance requirements based on your answers
and an insurance vendor list for consideration.

Who should create my Submittable account for applying to this Grant?
Our Guide to Account Holders vs Collaborators breaks down exactly who can and should be the “Account
Holder” in Submittable, and who should be brought in as a “Collaborator”. See Submittable’s Guide to
Inviting Collaborators for a full tutorial.
•   Note for Bands: If you are applying as Professional Musician on behalf of a band, the band leader
    must be the one to create the Submittable account and ofÏcially submit the application.

I’m applying as an individual. Before I start my application, I’m being asked to enter
an EIN. What should I do?
Submittable gives the option for applicants representing organizations with an Employee Identification
Number (EIN) to enter it before beginning their application. This allows Submittable to connect your
organization information directly to your application. However, this is not a required step! If you do not
have an EIN, skip this question and move to the application.



                                                                                                               2
The Austin Live Music Fund Website also has a dedicated Frequently Asked Questions
(FAQ) section covering the following topics:

• What if locations, dates, times, and talent are not yet confirmed for the activities I would like
  to pay for with awarded grant funds?

• Can multiple awardees combine their grant awards to pay for the same promoted activity?

• Studio time, merchandise production, and CD/record distribution are allowed?

• What does “released” mean in the “Professional Musician” definition?

• To be considered a qualifying “Professional Musician” do I have to have 2 years performing
  in Austin or anywhere?

• How soon or how late can eligible activities happen for the 2024 Austin Live Music Fund?

• What percentage of band members must live in the MSA?

• I have a regular gig in Austin where I invite different musicians to play at each show. Does
  this qualify as an eligible activity?

This FAQ will be updated regularly to support applicants and awardees.




                                                                                                      3
Austin Live Music Fund Eligibility Quiz
Below are the questions included in the Austin Live Music Fund Eligibility Quiz. This quiz helps to confirm
that you fit all of the eligibility requirements before you begin an application. Once you complete the quiz
and are determined to be eligible, you will be directed to the application page. If you are ineligible to apply,
you will be prevented from moving on to the application page.

If you receive a message that you’re ineligible and think you filled out the form incorrectly, you can simply
go back to the Submittable application home page and try again. If you have any questions about how
to answer the quiz, refer to the Austin Live Music Fund grant guidelines or contact the Long Center at
applicationhelp@thelongcenter.org or by phone at (512) 457-5161 (Spanish language assistance available).




    Will your grant funded activities be marketed and promoted to visiting and potential tourists
    and convention delegates?
    • Yes
    • No

    Are you applying as either a Professional Musician, Independent Promotor, or Live Music Venue?
    • Professional Musician
    • Independent Promotor
    • Live Music Venue
    • None of the Above

    Below is the City of Austin’s definition of a Professional Musician:
    • At least 2 years of documentation showing that Applicant has regularly performed as a
       professional musician—solo or as part of a band—in live performances to public audiences
    • Or, 6 released recordings (singles)
    • Or, 6 promotionally released music videos.

    Do you fit at least one of these eligibility criteria?
    • Yes
    • No

    You will be asked to provide documentation supporting your eligibility in the application.

    Beginning in Fiscal Year 2025, Professional Musicians and Independent Promoters cannot receive
    awards in two consecutive City of Austin fiscal years; therefore, if an applicant is awarded this
    year in Fiscal Year 2024, they will not be eligible to apply again until Fiscal Year 2026.




                                                                                                                4
Do you understand that you will not be eligible to apply to the Austin Live Music Fund again
until Fiscal Year 2026 if you accept a Fiscal Year 2024 grant award?
• Yes
• No

Musicians can perform in multiple bands receiving awards. However, a lead applicant must
be the designated leader of the band and will qualify to apply for just one application since
only one application is allowed per band.

A Professional Musician cannot apply as an Independent Promotor or Live Music Venue in
another application.

Are you the designated leader of the band listed in the 2024 Austin Live Music Fund
application?
• Yes
• No

Is your home address located in the Austin Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA)?
• Yes
• No

Ensure your address is in the Austin-Round Rock MSA by using the lookup tool. Enter your
address in the text box on the upper left-hand side of your screen. As you type your address it will
auto fill with address options. Select your address. If you live in the Austin MSA, the row labelled
‘MSA/MD Name’ will say “AUSTIN-ROUND ROCK-SAN MARCOS, TX”

Below is the definition of an Independent Promoter:
• No more than 3 employees, including the owner,
• And, Documentation showing that applicant has curated and promoted live shows featuring solo
   musicians and bands for at least two years,
• And, Must not be contractually tied to one venue.

Do you fit all of the above criteria?
• Yes
• No

You will be asked to provide documentation evidencing your eligibility in the application.

Beginning in Fiscal Year 2025, Professional Musicians and Independent Promoters cannot receive
awards in two consecutive City of Austin fiscal years; therefore, if an applicant is awarded in the
current Fiscal Year 2024, they will not be eligible to apply again until Fiscal Year 2026.


                                                                                                       5
Do you understand that you will not be eligible to apply to the Austin Live Music Fund again
until Fiscal Year 2026 if you accept a Fiscal Year 2024 grant award?
• Yes
• No

An Independent Promotor cannot apply as a Professional Musician or Live Music Venue in
another application, and only one application allowed per applicant.

Is this your only application to the 2024 Austin Live Music Fund?
• Yes
• No

Is your home address located in the Austin Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA)?
• Yes
• No

Ensure your address is in the Austin-Round Rock MSA by using the lookup tool. Enter your
address in the text box on the upper left-hand side of your screen. As you type your address it will
auto fill with address options. Select your address. If you live in the Austin MSA, the row labelled
‘MSA/MD Name’ will say “AUSTIN-ROUND ROCK-SAN MARCOS, TX”

Below is the definition of a Live Music Venue
An establishment where live music programming is the principal function of the business and/or the business
is a live music destination, and where the venue establishes the ability of an artist to receive payment
for work by percentage of sales, guarantee, or other mutually beneficial formal agreement for every
performance. A live music venue is a destination for live music consumers, and/or its music programming is
the primary driver of its business as indicated by the presence of at least five (5) of the following:

1: Defined performance and audience space
2: Mixing desk, PA system, and lighting rig
3: Backline
4: At least two of the following:
   • (i) Sound engineer
   • (ii) Booker
   • (iii) Promoter
   • (iv) Stage manager
   • (v) Security personnel
5: Charges admission to some music performances through ticketing or front door entrance fees
6: Markets acts through show listings in printed and electronic publications
7: Hours of operation coincide with performances
8: Programs live music at least five nights a week


                                                                                                              6
Do you fit at least five of the following requirements for a Live Music Venue?
• Yes
• No

You will be asked to provide documentation evidencing your eligibility in the application.

Is your venue address located in a City of Austin Council District or Extraterritorial
Jurisdiction (ETJ)?
• Yes
• No

Visit the Austin City Council District map to find the Council District of your venue. Click the
button labeled ‘I want to’ at the top left of the map. Select ‘Find my Council District’. Enter your
address in the text box on the upper left-hand side of your screen. As you type your address it will
auto-fill with address options. Select your address and click submit.

Will at least 51% of your expenses occur within the 10 Austin Council Districts?
• Yes
• No

Visit the Austin City Council District map to find the Council District of your activities. Click
the button labeled ‘I want to’ at the top left of the map. Select ‘Find my Council District’. Enter your
address in the text box on the upper left-hand side of your screen. As you type your address it will
auto-fill with address options. Select your address and click submit.

Applicants who have accepted grant funding from the Cultural Arts Fund in the current Fiscal
Year 2024 grant cycle are ineligible to be awarded a 2024 Austin Live Music Fund grant (refer
to Glossary of Terms for the definition of “Cultural Arts Fund”).

Do you understand that you CANNOT BE AWARDED a grant from the 2024 Austin Live Music
Fund if you have already applied for and accepted funding from the Cultural Arts Fund?
• Yes
• No

Please refer to Glossary of Terms for “Cultural Arts Fund”

Do you have “Delinquent Status” with the City of Austin Economic Development
Department?
• Yes
• No

Someone has ‘Delinquent Status’ if they have failed to comply with or complete all requirements of
another Economic Development Department funding program. This could include contracts that have
not been closed out by an EDD staff member.




                                                                                                           7
    Do you represent a government agency or public authority?
    • Yes
    • No

    Are you a full-time City of Austin Employee?
    • Yes
    • No

    Do you understand that it is not the City of Austin’s or Create Austin’s responsibility to
    advise on how a grant award might impact your individual tax situation?
    • Yes
    • No

    Receipt of grant funds may result in a significant tax liability in the tax year funds are received. It is
    the responsibility of the grant recipient to consult with a tax adviser to understand the impact based
    on individual tax situations.

    You will be asked to confirm some of these questions again at the end of your application.
    Please note that there can only be one complete application to the 2024 Austin Live Music Fund
    submitted per applicant.




How is the Application Set Up?
Section by Section Breakdown
Section 1: Contact Details and Grant-Funded Activity Information
This section asks for contact and applicant information, general information about your potential grant-
funded activities, and documentation that evidences your eligibility. Details about required documentation
evidence can be found in the last section of this guide.

Section 2: Demographic Questions
Your answers to the demographic questions are for City of Austin data collection needs and WILL NOT be
scored or even visible to anyone reviewing your application. Your answers to the demographic questions will
not impact the outcome of your application. Each question has a ‘Prefer not to answer’ option.

In the first half of this section, the City will ask demographic questions about you as the lead applicant. If
you are applying on behalf of a legally formed organization/entity, you will be asked for details about the


                                                                                                                 8
organization/entity. This includes the size, number of years in operation, and the structure of your business/
entity. You will then be asked demographic questions about the leadership of the organization/entity.
 For Live Music Venues answering demographic questions, you may select “Prefer not to answer” to the
personal demographic questions and only answer the questions for your organization/entity.

Section 3: Narrative
Your narrative answers in this section WILL NOT be scored, but collecting this information is crucial for the
City to understand how you will use the grant funds to grow and improve your business and/or band, while
promoting Austin to visiting and potential tourists and convention delegates.

Section 4: Limited Access to Services
This is the first scored section of the application. You will be asked multiple choice questions about your
economic situation, or the economic situation of your business if you are a Live Music Venue.

Section 5: Local Economic Impact
You will select all answers that apply from a drop-down list. You will then briefly explain your selections and
upload documentation evidencing each of your selections. Details on acceptable document types can be
found in the last section of this guide. You may also provide links to online evidence for your selections.

Section 6: Programming and Outreach
This section asks you to select, explain, and evidence how you or your venue’s past activities have expanded
audiences and amplified Austin’s diverse arts and culture sectors.

Section 7: Accessibility
This section asks if you or your venue’s past activities have provided accessibility features and programming
for non-English speaking communities. If you select yes to either of these questions, you will be asked to
provide a written explanation of these features along with documentation that evidences your explanation
as an upload and/or online links.

Section 8: Previous City of Austin Funding
This section asks if you received grant funding in the last year from the City of Austin. This includes the 2023
Live Music Fund Event Program if you’re a Professional Musician or Independent Promoter, and any grants
developed by the Austin Economic Development Department if you are applying as a venue.

Section 9: Grant Award and Tourism Marketing Plan Budgets
This section asks you to fill in two tables. The first is your “Grant Award Budget” table, where you will enter
spending amounts for your grant award. You will also fill in a description of these proposed expenses.

The “Tourism Marketing Plan Budget” is the second table. You will enter spending amounts for your grant
award for each marketing strategy you intend to use. Strategies include online digital campaigns, print and


                                                                                                                  9
radio ads, and other marketing asset production. Your Tourism Marketing Plan Budget total should be the
same total listed in the Tourism Marketing Total line of the “Grant Award Budget” table.

Section 10: Acknowledgements and Attestations
This is the final section of the application. You will be asked to agree to several statements, most of which
you will have confirmed in the eligibility quiz.

You will attest that:
•   You are not a full-time City of Austin Employee
•   You understand you cannot receive grant funding from both the Austin Live Music Fund and a Cultural
    Arts Fund program (Nexus, Elevate, or Thrive) in the same fiscal year.
•   There can only be one application to the 2024 Austin Live Music Fund submitted per applicant.
•   You do not have ‘Delinquent Status’ with the City of Austin’s Economic Development Department.
•   Your grant funds may result in significant tax liability in the year you are awarded, and that it is your
    responsibility to consult with a tax advisor to understand the impact of the award on your tax situation.
•   You understand that the City of Austin has contracted with Create Austin at the Long Center as the
    third-party administrator for its cultural funding programs and that Create Austin will not use any
    collected information for other purposes other than this grant.
•   Since this grant is funded through the City of Austin, your application materials are subject to the Texas
    Public Information Act and might be released to the public if it is requested in a Public Information
    Request. Personal information like home addresses and other personal details will not be included.
•   You agree to receive communications from the City of Austin Economic Development Department and
    Create Austin at The Long Center to facilitate application and awardee processes.
•   All information provided in the application and the eligibility quiz are true and accurate at the time of
    submission.




Fillable Application Templates
Create Austin has created fillable Micrsoft Word templates for the Austin Live Music Fund application so that
you may prepare your answers before applying.

The templates list each narrative or scored question word for word. They also list all evidencing requirements
and provide a space to draft your answers before logging into your Submittable account to apply.

This is an optional tool. You may also save your work within the Submittable portal and then return to your
application as often as necessary before the application period closes.



                                                                                                                10
To access the template, click on your applicant category below:

   Professional Musicians and Independent Promotors: Application Template

   Live Music Venues: Application Template



Templates Include:

Narrative Questions: You are given a space to draft your narrative responses to the unscored questions in
Section 3. All narrative questions have a 2000-character limit. Refer to the Create Austin Guide to Writing
a Good Grant Application, which offers general advice on narrative questions. However, please remember
that this section WILL NOT be scored.

Scored Questions: All scored questions in the application have multiple-choice selections. When filling out
your Submittable application, you will select the answer (or answers) that best fit your situation.

Supporting Documentation: The template outlines all questions where you must provide supporting
documentation to evidence your selections to receive points. Gathering this information before you begin the
application can make the process easier. The following page gives more details on documentation evidence
requirements.

Grant Award & Tourism Marketing Budget Tables: The templates include fillable versions of both the
“Grant Award Budget” table and the “Tourism Marketing Plan Budget” table. Submittable does not easily let
applicants copy information from an external table into the form, but these templates are tools to help you
plan ahead.




Required Supporting
Documentation Evidence
Supporting document uploads are required throughout this application. They can be split into two
categories: Eligibility Evidence and Scored Question Evidence.

• Eligibility Evidence: To confirm your eligibility, you must upload evidence for each eligibility
  requirement.

• Scored Question Evidence: To receive points, you must upload evidence for each multiple-choice
  selection.




                                                                                                              11
Uploads may consist of web links —which can be entered directly into the Submittable application form.
There is also the option to upload document evidence – including screenshots, scans, and photos of online
and physical materials.

Please refer to this webpage if you are using a Mac before you start. Apple files are not supported and
cannot be uploaded in this application.

Acceptable file upload types for all computer operating systems (PC and Mac) include .doc, .docx, .pdf, .jpg,
.png, .mp3, .wav, .mov, .mp4, .ppt, .pptx, .xls, and .xlsx



Eligibility – Professional Musicians & Independent Promoters

To confirm eligibility to process an application, documentation must demonstrate active participation for at
least 2 years, including:
•   Professional Musician: Applicant has regularly performed solo or as part of a band in live performances
    to public audiences for at least 2 years; or, evidence of 6 released recordings, or evidence of 6
    promotionally released music videos.
•   Independent Promoter: Applicant has curated and promoted live shows featuring musicians and bands
    for at least 2 years; must not be contractually tied to one venue; and has no more than 3 employees.
•   Acceptable Documentation to confirm eligibility as a “Professional Musician” and an “Independent
    Promoter” include:
    •   Current resume or curriculum vitae (CV)
    •   Current biography
    •   Screenshot or PDF of LinkedIn work history
    •   Press demonstrating involvement within the music sector
    •   Portfolio (web links, screenshots, printouts, scans, etc.)
    •   Marketing materials for performances, exhibitions, showings, productions, collections, or recitals.
    •   Materials showing merchandise created and sold, including screenshots of websites that exhibit or
        sell the applicant’s products
    •   Credits or liner notes
    •   Purchased advertising to Austin residents
    •   Contracts for performances, exhibitions, showings, commissions, recitals, productions, or production
        services
    •   Letter from employer or manager stating role and involvement in the music sector
    •   Website screenshot of events or concert schedule with location




                                                                                                              12
Eligibility – Live Music Venues

Applicants must provide documentation supporting their eligibility as a Live Music Venue, including:
•   Photos of performance and audience spaces, mixing desk, PA system, lighting rig, and backline
•   Employee documentation for sound engineer, booker, promoter, stage manager, or security personnel,
    including Forms W-2, W-9, 941, or 1099
•   Evidence of marketing placements, hours of operation coinciding with performances, ticketing, and
    frequency of live music performances through a website, social media, and print publications
•   Previous year operating budget or profit & loss statement to determine grant award amount
    (accounting software and applications can easily generate this information)



Scored Question Evidence
Applicants must provide uploaded documentation to support their scored application answers. This includes
evidence of local economic impact, accessibility, and programming outreach. Acceptable types of evidence
include:
•   Executed agreements
•   Reservations
•   Receipts
•   Photos
•   Marketing placements as: website, e-newsletter, social media, and printed publications.




                                                                                                        13
