                MUSIC COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION 20220207-3b


Date: February 7, 2022

Subject: Live Music Fund

Motioned By: Vice-chair Medicharla

Seconded By: Commissioner Limon

Motion: For the Music Commission to vote on option one, which is, rolling out a program
including all eligible uses and all eligible applicants from the first year onwards, or option two,
to roll out a pilot program including all eligible uses and with Musicians and Independent
Promoters as eligible applicants. Include “Live Music Venue Promoter” as an eligible applicant
in the second year of the program.

Recommendation
The Music Commission recommends Option 2: Initiate a pilot program which
1. Includes all eligible uses (live music performance PLUS music industry
production activities which support the music ecosystem) and with Musicians and
Independent Promoters as eligible applicants
2. Includes Live Music Venue Promoter as an eligible applicant in year two of the
program
3. Implement metrics to measure outcomes and to ensure accountability


Description of Recommendation to Council
A Live Music Fund Working Group formed at the November 2021 Music Commission to
consider expanding fund uses and eligible applicants pool to robustly sustain and grow the
Austin music economy.

Working Group Participants: Nagavalli Medicharla (Working Group Chair, nominated),
Chaka Mahone, Lauryn Gould, Scott Strickland, Stuart Sullivan, Mobley, Harold McMillan,
Morgan Davis, Rebecca Reynolds, Cody Cowan, Tomar Williams, Alex Vallejo
Meetings: 3 total (Nov. 2021, Dec. 2021, Jan. 2022); 1.5-2.5hr duration each
Working Group Outcomes

1. Eligible uses
Broaden eligible uses where a Musician can spend grant funds to include
    ➔ Recording Studio Production
    ➔ Music Video Production
    ➔ Publishing/Sync Licensing
    ➔ Distribution (streaming services)
    ➔ Replication (vinyl, CD, cassette printing, etc.)
    ➔ Broadcasting (TV, radio, podcasts)
in addition to producing live music performances

2. Eligible applicants
Broaden eligible applicants to include Live Music Venue Promoters in addition to Musicians and
Independent Promoters

3. Metrics
Develop and implement metrics to measure outcomes and to ensure accountability (metrics from
fund administrator and vendors incl. venues)

4. Fund Rollout
Option 1: Rollout a program including all eligible uses and all eligible applicants (as stated
above) from the first year onwards
or
Option 2: Rollout a pilot program including all eligible uses (as stated above) and with
Musicians and Independent Promoters as eligible applicants. Include Live Music Venue
Promoter as an eligible applicant in a future year (later updated to “Include Live Music Venue
Promoter as an eligible applicant in the second year of the program”).

The Working Group reiterated that Diversity, Equity and Inclusion principles via PIE
(Preservation, Innovation and Elevation) guidelines should serve as the core guiding
principles for administering the Live Music Fund

Rationale:
The working group consisted of representatives of multiple facets of the Austin music industry
representing years of industry expertise. There was broad consensus on expansion of eligible
uses to the ecosystem and inclusion of venue promoters as eligible applicants. The working
group did not reach a unique conclusion on fund/program rollout and therefore, presented two
options (Option 1 and Option 2 above) for rollout at the Music Commission; the commissioners
voted with a majority for Option 2.

The Music Commission is excited to advance these recommendations to the City Council and
kick off implementation of this historic public investment in Austin music.

Vote

Option One
For: 3 (Commissioners Garcia, Vice-Chair Medicharla, Chair Patterson)

Against: 7 (Commissioners Strickland, Limon, Mahone, Rosenthal, Reynolds, Gould, Pike)

Abstain: 0

Absent: 1 (Commissioners Sullivan)

Option Two
For: 7 (Commissioners Strickland, Limon, Mahone, Rosenthal, Reynolds, Gould, Pike)

Against: 3 (Commissioners Garcia, Vice-Chair Medicharla, Chair Patterson)

Abstain: 0

Absent: 1 (Commissioner Sullivan)

Attest: Kim McCarson, Liaison
