                                    RESOLUTION NO.
      WHEREAS, Resolution No. 20160818-075 created an 18-member Visitor Impact

Task Force by resolution that recommended many of the features, elements, and benefits of

the Mayor's Downtown Puzzle; and

      WHEREAS, the Austin City Council passed Resolution No. 20170209-033 directing

the City Manager to provide information about financial needs related to various projects

and entities in eastern downtown; and

      WHEREAS, Resolution No. 20170209-033 directed the City Manager to assess a

number of financial tools and possible funding options for the projects and entities in eastern

downtown; and

      WHEREAS, Interim Chief Financial Officer Greg Canally issued a memo on July 6,

2017 titled “Update to Financing for Downtown Projects – ‘Downtown Puzzle’,” that laid

out potential financing mechanisms and options for putting together the Downtown Puzzle;

and

      WHEREAS, long-standing needs, including addressing homelessness, supporting the

local music industry, preserving historic sites, and preserving Latino/Hispanic and Black

culture, in and around eastern downtown require immediate and stable funding sources to be

realized;

      WHEREAS, Interim Chief Financial Officer Canally presented scenario funding

options for the downtown puzzle on August 29, 2017, including Scenario C, which is the

preferred option; NOW, THEREFORE,

                                         Page 1 of 5
BE IT RESOLVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF AUSTIN:

      The City Manager is directed to put the City Council in the position to assemble the

“Downtown Puzzle” plan by bringing back to Council, as soon as is timely and practicable,

ordinances, agreements, and any other tools necessary to do so. Projects in the puzzle may

include, but are not limited to, the following (including consideration of a process to choose

items to be included):

   1. Upon receipt of a petition requesting establishment of a Tourism Public Improvement

      District (TPID) establish the TPID, renewable after 2029, at 1% as soon as is

      practicable, to expand to 2% as soon as the current 2% hotel occupancy tax venue tax

      debt is defeased, including a requirement that 40% of all remitted TPID tax will be

      used to exclusively fund homeless support and housing which will provide for public

      safety and health and sanitation purposes in and around downtown which will improve

      and benefit the downtown hotels participating in the TPID.

   2. Expansion of the Austin Convention Center through the option presented to the

      Council and the Visitor Impact Task Force as option 2b “plus,” which expands the

      Convention Center using a 2% increase in hotel occupancy tax (Convention Center

      Expansion Funding) and which also should explore the use of a public-private

      partnership, long-term land leases, and construction of residential and office towers

      above the expanded convention space.

   Using Convention Center Expansion Funding for:



                                         Page 2 of 5
a. Negotiating the purchase of the Palm School from Travis County as part of the

   Convention Center Expansion Funding if possible, allowing for the best option

   for the City that allows the Palm School to be part of Convention Center

   facilities and that provides for allowable public and civic use of the space.

b. Completing the Emma S. Barrientos Mexican American Cultural Center in all

   or part as a project of the Convention Center Expansion Funding if appropriate

   as a portion of the Convention Center facilities, or through another funding

   mechanism.

c. Purchasing, renovating, or repairing other historic assets in the immediate

   vicinity of the Convention Center, including historic East Sixth Street, historic

   portions of the Red River Cultural District, and visitor centers. These projects

   should include, but not be limited to, Palm Park, Castleman-Bull House, Trask

   House, Austin Central Fire Station 1, Wedding House, Brush Square Park, O.

   Henry Museum, Dickinson-Hanning House, Depot, and the Rainey Street

   Historic District.

d. Purchasing, renovating, or repairing other historic assets throughout the city

   that attract tourists and convention delegates as allowed by state law, including,

   but not limited to, the Austin History Center, Arnold Bakery Building, Barton

   Springs (Eliza Spring), historic sites within Zilker Park, Buford Tower, Blue

   Bonnet Courts, Mount Bonnell, Andrew M. Cox Ranch Site, French Legation,


                               Page 3 of 5
   George Washington Carver Museum, Gethsemane Lutheran Church, Tejano

   Walking Trail, Goodman Building, Laguna Gloria, Haehnel Building, Lamar

   Boulevard Bridge, Lions Municipal Golf Course, McKinney Homestead,

   Montopolis Bridge, Moonlight Towers, Elisabet Ney Museum, Oakwood

   Cemetery, Paramount Theatre, Smith Rock Shelter, Southgate-Lewis House

   (Fontaine Religious Museum), Viaer Alumni Hall (Huston-Tillotson

   University), Victory Grill, Wesley United Methodist Church, Wooldridge Park,

   Judge Sebron Sneed House, Austin Memorial Park, Evergreen Cemetery,

   Oakwood Cemetery Annex, Plummers Cemetery, Barton Springs Bathhouse,

   Burditt Prairie Cemetery, Madison Log Cabin, Dedrick-Hamilton House, Zilker

   Amphitheater, Downs Field, Seaholm Intake Facility, Norwood House, Umlauf

   Museum, Shoal Creek 6th Street Bridge, Shoal Creek Railroad Trestle, Congress

   Avenue Old Bakery, Cristo Rey Catholic Church, Rosewood Courts, Simpson

   United Methodist Church, the Mexic-Arte Museum, downtown portions of

   Congress Avenue, and the Montopolis Negro School.

e. Creating dedicated funding streams through the Convention Center Expansion

   Fund that will provide at least $3.2 million for the local music industry and at

   least $3.2 million for historic preservation annually.

f. Exploring renovation and expansion options of all or part of the Travis County

   Exposition Center as a convention center facility located in the City of Austin,

   either funded directly with Hotel Occupancy Tax, or funded through
                               Page 4 of 5
           establishment of a venue with a stream of venue funding as allowed by state

           law.

  3. Extending the Waller Creek Tax Increment Finance Zone (TIF) for a length of time

     to provide funding to complete renovation of the chain of parks within the Waller

     Creek Design Plan approved by Council to be matched by philanthropic funding, and

     providing for a public improvement district or other funding mechanism so that the

     area properties pay for the maintenance and operation of the parks.

  4. Creating of a downtown TIF or other funding mechanism (including concepts such as

     participating in the Downtown Austin Alliance funding mechanism) to provide at least

     $30 million to help serve those experiencing homelessness.




ADOPTED: _________________, 2017              ATTEST: __________________________
                                                          Jannette S. Goodall
                                                              City Clerk




                                      Page 5 of 5
