        Visitor Impact Task Force
Final Report to Austin City Council




                           June 30, 2017

This document provides the analyses and deliberations of the Visitor Impact Task
 Force, to develop and report recommendations relevant to Austin City Council
                         Resolution No. 20160818-075.
Table of Contents
Executive Summary............................................................................................................................................... 3
Introduction .......................................................................................................................................................... 8
   Task Force Scope............................................................................................................................................... 8
   Membership...................................................................................................................................................... 9
   Meeting Details ............................................................................................................................................... 10
   Council Resolution .......................................................................................................................................... 10
   Extension of Due Date .................................................................................................................................... 10
Data Provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force ................................................................................................. 10
Key Findings ........................................................................................................................................................ 13
   Review of Texas Tax Code Chapter 351 and allowable uses of Hotel Occupancy Taxes ................................ 13
   Review of current uses of Hotel Occupancy Taxes and the impact of those activities and expenditures on
   tourism in the City .......................................................................................................................................... 14
   Review of State and National best practices for tourism programs ............................................................... 22
   Study the impact of tourism on City infrastructure, services, and facilities ................................................... 24
   Review of current tourist activity in the City of Austin and what events, venues, or facilities those tourists
   attend while visiting........................................................................................................................................ 25
   Review the Austin Convention Center expansion, all possible design options and potential funding
   mechanisms .................................................................................................................................................... 29
   Consideration of the creation of a Tourism Public Improvement District...................................................... 33
   Additional Topic Covered by Task Force – Welcome Centers ........................................................................ 33
Detailed Recommendations ............................................................................................................................... 34
Appendices ......................................................................................................................................................... 39
   Appendix A ...................................................................................................................................................... 40
       Council Resolution 20160818-075 .............................................................................................................. 40
   Appendix B ...................................................................................................................................................... 43
       Recommendation Discussion Notes ........................................................................................................... 43




                                                                                                                                                        2|Page
Executive Summary
The Visitor Impact Task Force (VITF or Task Force) was created by resolution 20160818-075 approved by the
Austin City Council (Council) on August 18, 2016. The Task Force held its first meeting on December 12, 2016,
when 17 of 18 members were seated. The 18-member Task Force represented a variety of visitor industry
interests, including representatives from the following communities and groups: hotel, restaurant, workforce,
arts, music, events, parks, historic preservation, environment, public safety, convention center, and convention
and visitors bureau.
As intended by Council, there were many different viewpoints expressed by Task Force members. The
recommendations were unanimously adopted by the 14 Task Force members present, plus one abstention.
The success of the Task Force has been predicated on a philosophy of inclusion and not from the standpoint of
any one person or group.

The Task Force was subject to the provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act, and all meetings were open to
the public and included opportunities for public comment.
The Council resolution directed the Task Force to “make recommendations to the City Council about how best
to utilize all hotel occupancy revenue to impact tourism.”
This overarching directive guided the Task Force through its deliberations and informed the following key Task
Force recommendations:
       Overarching Recommendations:
            o With regard to all uses of the Hotel Occupancy Tax, equity should be considered and funding
                 should be inclusive and reflect the diversity of this community, with inclusive consideration
                 for under-served areas and under-represented communities.
            o Sustainability practices should be considered in the expansion of the Convention Center so
                 that community values and input are included in the process and put into practice.
                       Visit Austin should conduct a dialogue with community stakeholders, the
                         Environmental Commission, and the Joint Sustainability Committee on the
                         “greening” and sustainability practices of the tourism industry
       The Visitor Impact Task Force recommends expansion of the Austin Convention Center (ACC) following
        the consultant’s recommended option to the West, non-contiguous (leaving Trinity Street open), IF:
            o Financing concept 2b, increasing the Ch. 351 Hotel Occupancy Tax (HOT) by 2%, and retiring
                 the current debt as soon as possible (estimated in the year 2021) is utilized, and
            o The City seeks land acquisition through a long-term ground lease, or some other development
                 agreement, that provides for the land and any additional development to remain on the tax
                 roll. More specifically:
                       Expanding the Convention Center should be integrated with other uses, such as
                         street-level restaurant/retail space in order to activate the area, and residential
                         (including affordable housing) and/or office, with the possibility of reducing project
                         costs.




                                                                                                    3|Page
Executive Summary (continued)

                      The City should issue a Request for Information for integrating the expansion of the
                       Convention Center with other uses that would contribute to street activity and a
                       healthy urban fabric in downtown’s southeast quadrant while maintaining the City’s
                       intact street grid and valuable land and development on the property tax rolls for the
                       benefit of the entire City.
                   The Convention Center expansion should be used to repair the urban framework in
                       the immediate vicinity of the convention center. Improvements should include those
                       described in the Waller Creek Conservancy vision for the Convention Center area as
                       well as the Red River Cultural District and pedestrian connections between the
                       Convention Center and the Rainey Street neighborhood.
                   Through the geographic expansion of the Waller Creek Tax Increment Financing
                       District and/or a similar mechanism, additional property tax revenues from the
                       expansion should be considered to address urgent social problems in this area of
                       downtown.
         o Involve the Design Commission and the community in ongoing conversations about the design
             of the expansion, and
         o The expansion project includes additional allowable area improvements that are important to
             the community (to be finally determined as project moves forward, but should consider
             capital improvements involving acquisition and development of Palm School, improvements
             to: Waller Creek (in conjunction with the Waller Creek Conservancy), Mexican-American
             Cultural Center, Red River Cultural District, nearby historic landmarks, etc.), and
         o The bond covenants include in the Flow of Funds direction that excess funds remaining after
             debt service and convention center operations and capital funding, as outlined in the funding
             illustrations, be utilized for:
                   A fund for allowable uses related to commercial music, up the maximum allowed by
                       law, while leaving the current 15% allocation of the 7% Ch. 351 HOT for the current
                       Cultural Arts Funding, and
                   A fund for historic preservation, up the maximum allowed by law, and
                   Excess funding should be split 50/50 between the music fund and historic
                       preservation fund until the allocation to music reaches the maximum allowed by law
                       (15% of the additional 2% Ch. 351 assessment), at which point funding in excess of
                       that music threshold will be allocated to historic preservation. Should funding ever
                       exceed the maximum allowed for historic preservation, Council should evaluate the
                       need for allocations to additional allowable uses.
     Music/Arts
         o Consider the following for the Economic Development Department’s Cultural Arts Division
             grant program:
                   Marketing/Access/Outreach
                              Website - Grants Funding page(s) more user friendly.
                              Enhanced Community Outreach/Marketing - Dedicated interactive
                               monthly outreach events to under-served communities that includes
                               previous recipients as presenters: arts organizations, musicians, artists.
                              Marketing - Increased visibility in under-served community via targeted
                               outreach campaign. Make materials more relevant visually and culturally

                                                                                                  4|Page
Executive Summary (continued)

          o   Consider the following for use of a portion of the additional funding allocated to music from
              the convention center expansion funding:
                      Grant Funding
                            Artist-as-Entrepreneur (Core Funding) - Austin musicians and artists add
                                tremendous value to culture, and even further, to economic growth in the
                                ‘Live Music Capital.’ Funding preference to ideas and plans that stimulate
                                growth, and develop tourism opportunities in under-served communities.
                            Specific funding to expand and develop individual artists that are building
                                successful arts ventures with a history of growth
                                 Incubator ($2,000-$10,000) - business with 1-2-year history. Funding
                                     delivery includes mentorship.
                                 Growth ($10,000-$25,000) - business with 3-5-year history, proven
                                     growth, and strategic plan. Funding delivery includes mentorship.
                                 Expansion ($25,000-$100,000)- 5-7-year history, previous funding from
                                     CAD, clear community partnership/investment. Funding delivery
                                     includes mentorship.
                            Artists’ receiving funding in Growth and Expansion phases must become
                                mentors as a stipulation of their participation in the program.
                            Each funding level can only be received once per artist.
     Historic Preservation Activities should be amended as follows:
          o   Transfer administration of the Historic Preservation and Heritage Grant program from the
              Austin Convention and Visitors Bureau (ACVB or Visit Austin) to a non-profit (e.g. Austin
              Community Foundation) or City department with an advisory board that make the decisions
              on the grants. The Advisory Board should be composed of a broad and inclusive set of
              stakeholders representing a variety of historic preservation, cultural heritage, and tourism
              interests. Look to other grant programs as a model including the Texas Historical
              Commission’s Texas Preservation Trust Fund (TPTF), and History Colorado’s State Historical
              Fund (SHF).
          o   Maintain percentage funding levels from HOT revenues for the Cultural Arts grant program
              and ACVB Tourism Promotion Fund.
          o   Revise eligibility and grant administration guidelines while retaining consistency with State
              law and City Code:
                   Remove the requirement that three bids be received for all work.
                   Eliminate the cap on the maximum amount for individual grants.
                   Allow for funding of privately-owned properties that are regularly open to the public
                       (e.g. commercial properties).
                   Establish grant scoring criteria to favor properties owned by public and non-profit
                       entities, projects that impact culturally-significant historic sites that have been under-
                       represented, and entertainment and cultural districts that have the capacity to
                       attract a more diverse tourist audience.
                   Establish grant scoring criteria to encourage funding to assist sites to be more “visitor-
                       ready”, or that attract tourists to areas that have not traditionally served tourists.
                   Expand the type of projects eligible for funding to include interior work, building
                       systems, interpretive signage, etc.
                   Look to other grant programs as a model for eligible scopes of work, selection


                                                                                                     5|Page
Executive Summary (continued)

                       processes, and restrictions based upon the type of grant recipient including the TPTF
                       and SHF.
                   Remove any caps on the amount of grant funds that can be provided toward a specific
                       site or total project cost at a site.
          o   Establish percentage of revenue from HOT associated with the expansion of the Austin
              Convention Center (plan 2b) or from a Tourism Public Improvement District (TPID) to be
              dedicated to a Historic Preservation and Heritage Grant Program.
                   Prior to any expansion of the HOT tax due to ACC or TPID, continue to allocate $1.5
                       million to a Historic Preservation and Heritage Grant Program. Until ACC expansion
                       is creating additional 2 percent, would come out of Tourism Promotion, but if/when
                       expansion and/or TPID approved, funds would come from waterfall dollars.

     Visit Austin
           o Establish a Marketing Advisory Committee that would meet quarterly and include local small
               business groups (i.e. Red River Cultural District and Austin Independent Business Alliance
               (AIBA)), arts and cultural organizations, under-represented community stakeholders, and
               other impacted stakeholders to advise and collaborate with Visit Austin on tourism marketing
               plans and diversity tourism.
           o Visit Austin should continue to support the areas of cultural, heritage, music and local business
               and develop marketing efforts to support robust tourism plans in each of those areas.
     Tourism Public Improvement District (TPID)
           o The City Council should begin the process of formation of a TPID with the hotel industry at the
               maximum allowable rate amenable to the industry, mindful of the potential hotel occupancy
               tax rate changes as the convention center debt/venue tax is retired and the HOT rate returns
               to an overall 15 percent rate.
           o The City Council should direct staff to identify specific ways the City can use TPID dollars to
               offset public safety and business district infrastructure costs associated with tourism.
     Short-term Rental Tax Collection –
           o The City Council should direct City staff to establish a mechanism to collect HOT directly from
               online marketplaces where transactions occur.
     Welcome Center –
           o Within the expansion bonding capacity, determine if there is a possibility to provide funding
               (estimated at $5 million) for a Welcome Center located in Zilker Park near Barton Springs Pool,
               or other qualifying tourist destination areas that promote tourism and the convention and
               hotel industry.
           o In future years, as the additional annual funding available to music and historic preservation
               through the convention center expansion financing flow of funds increases, and the amount
               available for music reaches the 15% maximum, consideration should be given to allocating a
               portion of the excess funding available for historic preservation to costs associated with
               welcome centers located on City-owned property.
           o As funding is assigned to a specific welcome center, the percentage of funding allocated to
               covers costs should be aligned with the percentage of welcome center visitors who are from
               out-of-town.




                                                                                                  6|Page
Executive Summary (continued)

Impact of Recommendations to the City’s economy, taxpayer, and general fund
As discussed later in this report, hotel occupancy tax is not the only local tax contribution from the visitor
industry. Visitor spending results in sales, alcohol beverage, vehicle rental taxes, as well as passenger facility
charges to the airport. The overall economic impact of the visitor industry also extends beyond the local tax
contributions bringing significant revenue to hotels, restaurants, bars, and local businesses, thus creating jobs
for local residents.
The Task Force recommendations will result in a positive impact to the local economy, as well as all recipients
of the local tax contributions, including the City’s general fund. Through additional annual funding for historic
preservation projects for Parks and Recreation Department assets, the transfer of general fund dollars to those
project funds is reduced, providing for other general fund services to utilize those funds. Through the
identification of additional funding for promotion of music and musicians, a key initiative of City Council, efforts
to address certain challenges facing local musicians will be funded through hotel occupancy tax, as opposed to
general fund dollars.
Through the creation of a Tourism Public Improvement District with agreed-upon funds provided to the City,
certain costs typically covered by the general fund will also be alternately funded.
The combined effect of the Task Force recommendations provides for the continued success of the Austin
Convention Center and Visit Austin, maintains the funding for the City’s well-established Cultural Arts grant
program, and allows for the additional funding for music and historic preservation. For these reasons, the Task
Force encourages the City Council to move forward with all of the recommendations as outlined.
The Task Force members appreciate the opportunity to serve our community and produce this report for the
Council.




James Russell, Chair                                                            MariBen Ramsey, Vice-chair
Visitor Impact Task Force                                                       Visitor Impact Task Force




                                                                                                        7|Page
Introduction
Beginning with its first meeting in December 2016, the Task Force held public meetings in 4 main locations:
Pan American Recreation Center, Palmer Events Center, Austin Convention Center, and the Hyatt Regency
Austin.
A related speakupaustin! discussion forum was also available for public comment submissions. The forum
generated 78 responses from 28 participants. The complete discussion content has been posted to the VITF
website.
The Task Force received regular support from the following City of Austin departments:
       Austin Convention Center Department (ACCD)
       Corporate Public Information Office (CPIO)
       Economic Development Department (EDD)
       Law Department
       Parks and Recreation Department (PARD)

Task Force Scope
The scope of work for the VITF included:
    1. Study the impact of tourism on City infrastructure, services, and facilities, and investigate
       opportunities to offset those impacts by using Hotel Occupancy Tax revenues;
    2. Review of current uses of Hotel Occupancy Taxes and the impact of those activities and expenditures
       on tourism in the City;
    3. Review of current tourist activity in the City of Austin and what events, venues, or facilities those
       tourists attend while visiting;
    4. Review of State and National best practices for tourism programs;
    5. Review of Texas Tax Code Chapter 351 and allowable uses of Hotel Occupancy Taxes under the Tax
       Code including parks, historic preservation, cultural heritage, music, arts, special events, fee waivers,
       convention, visitors bureau, transportation, downtown districts, venues and other facilities and debt
       defeasance for city-owned hotels and convention facilities;
    6. Review the Austin Convention Center expansion, all possible design options and potential funding
       mechanisms; and
    7. Make recommendations to the City Council about how to best utilize all hotel occupancy revenue to
       impact tourism.




                                                                                                    8|Page
Introduction (continued)
Membership
Membership of the VITF consisted of:
       2 members of the music industry nominated by the Music Commission;
       2 members of the arts community nominated by the Arts Commission;
       2 members of the special events industry; one nominated by the Parkland Events Task Force and one
        nominated by the Economic Opportunity Committee;
       1 member nominated by the Austin Convention and Visitors Bureau;
       1 member of the hotel industry nominated by the Economic Opportunity Committee;
       1 member of the public safety community nominated by the Public Safety Commission;
       1 member of the preservation community nominated by the Historic Landmark Commission;
       1 member of the parks community nominated by the Parks & Recreation Board;
       1 member from the Convention Center;
       1 member nominated by the Downtown Commission;
       2 community members who represent the tourism workforce nominated by the Economic Opportunity
        Committee;
       1 community member appointed by the Planning and Neighborhood Committee;
       1 member of the environmental community nominated by the Environmental Commission;
       1 member representing the restaurant industry nominated by the Economic Opportunity Committee;
       1 ex officio member from the Public Works Department; and
       1 ex officio member from the Austin Transportation Department
          Task Force Member             Area Represented
          Gavin Garcia                  Music Industry Representative
          Catlin Whitington             Music Industry Representative
          Lulu Flores                   Arts Community Representative
          MariBen Ramsey                Arts Community Representative
          James Russell                 Special Events Industry Representative
          Julie Niehoff                 Special Events Industry Representative
          Tom Noonan                    Austin Convention & Visitors Bureau Representative
          Shelly Schadegg               Hotel Industry Representative
          Bill Worsham                  Public Safety Community Representative
          Alyson McGee                  Preservation Community Representative
          Dan Keshet                    Parks Community Representative
          Mark Tester                   Convention Center Representative
          Dewitt Peart                  Downtown Commission Representative
          Ashwin Ghatalia               Tourism Workforce Representative
          Stephen Sternschein           Tourism Workforce Representative
          Jonathan Mahone               Community Member Representative
          Pam Thompson                  Environmental Community Representative
          Skeeter Miller                Restaurant Industry Representative
          Richard Mendoza               Public Works Department Representative (ex-officio)
          Gordon Derr                   Transportation Department Representative (ex-officio)




                                                                                                9|Page
Introduction (continued)
Meeting Details
       Range of Meeting Dates:                            December 12, 2016 – May 23, 2017
       Public Meetings:                                   13 meetings held
       Public Meeting Hours:                              Nearly 41 hours of public meeting time
       Staff Time at Meetings:                            192+ hours
       Meeting Locations                                  4 locations
    VITF was subject to the provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act, and all meetings were open to the
    public and included opportunities for public comment.

Council Resolution
                                        RESOLUTION NO. 20160818-075

See full resolution at the above link, or in Appendix A.

The resolution established the 18-member Visitor Impact Task Force and directed the group to study various
aspects of the visitor industry in Austin, the use of Hotel Occupancy Tax, and provide related recommendations
to Council.


Extension of Due Date
The VITF voted to seek an extension to the April 1, 2017 deadline established in Council’s resolution. A memo
from Assistant City Manager Mark Washington was sent to Council on April 7, 2017.


Data Provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
The Austin Convention Center Department staff, the Austin Convention and Visitors Bureau staff, and the City’s
Economic Development Department staff provided information to the Visitor Impact Task Force. Hard copies
of presentations, historical reports, and other reference information was provided to each Task Force member
at each meeting.
Visitor Impact Task Force members submitted questions for City staff to the Task Force’s staff liaison, Felicia
Ojeda, Marketing and Public Relations Coordinator, Austin Convention Center Department. City staff
responded to questions in writing, and all responses were posted to the Visitor Impact Task Force Resource
Website.
Over the course of the meetings, staff from various City departments presented information, participated in
panel discussions, and provided additional resource information. City departments included Austin Convention
Center Department, Economic Development Department, Law Department, Parks and Recreation Department,
Public Works Department, Austin Resource Recovery, Austin Transportation Department, Austin Police
Department, Austin Center for Events, Aviation and Financial Services Department.
The Task Force also heard from representatives from the Cities of San Antonio, Texas, and El Paso, Texas,
regarding how those cities utilize Hotel Occupancy Tax.




                                                                                                  10 | P a g e
Data Provided to Visitor Impact Task Force (continued)
Information presented/provided by staff from City of Austin, ACVB, Task Force members, City of El Paso, and
City of San Antonio during VITF meetings included:
    1. Ethics and Conflicts of Interest
    2. Hotel Occupancy Tax (HOT) legal uses authorized by Chapter 351 of Texas Tax Code and Chapter 334
        of Texas Local Government Code
    3. Current uses of HOT in the City of Austin
    4. City’s historic grant program
    5. Austin Convention Center Department operations
    6. Austin Convention and Visitors Bureau use of HOT
    7. Cultural Arts Division use of HOT
    8. Austin Convention Center Long-Range Plan and proposed plans for expansion
    9. City of Austin HOT collections
    10. Review of Council Resolution 20170209-033
    11. Impacts of tourism on City of Austin Departments via panel discussions
    12. Visitor contributions to the City’s general fund
    13. PARD relationship with tourism and heritage/historic tourism
    14. Best practices in other cities – via conference call session with other cities
    15. City’s financial reporting
    16. Austin Convention Center Department presentation of cash, financial position, capital project
        financing, and debt
    17. Economic Impact of Historic Preservation in Texas executive summary
Additional Information Provided by City Staff – Posted on VITF website included:
    1. Hotel Occupancy Tax references
           a. Texas Tax Code Chapter 351
           b. Texas Local Government Code Chapter 334
           c. Texas Hotel Lodging Association’s What Cities Need to Know to Administer Municipal Hotel
               Occupancy Taxes
           d. Texas Municipal League’s The Hotel Tax “Two-Step”
           e. City of Austin Code of Ordinances Chapter 11-2
           f. Texas Tourism Economic Impact Report
    2. Responses to VITF questions
           a. Answers covering ACCD budget, financial reporting, venue and debt information
           b. Answers covering ACCD Financial Presentation
           c. ACCD Property Tax Analysis
           d. ACCD expansion financial projections
           e. ACCD attendance, occupancy, vacant days, events, hotel stays, Austin meeting space
           f. VITF FAQ Fact Sheet
    3. Additional Information from City Departments
           a. ACCD
                      i. Supplemental Information – Expansion Financing Concepts Illustrations
                     ii. Local Tax Contribution by Visitors
                    iii. Chapter 351 HOT Assessment 7% Allocation
                    iv. Response to Council Resolution 20151112-033


                                                                                              11 | P a g e
Data Provided to Visitor Impact Task Force (continued)
                     v. Town Hall Meeting Flyer, Illustration, Presentation, and Responses to Related
                         Comments
                    vi. Florida TaxWatch Report - Impact on Tourism(Draft), and Impact on Tourism(Final)
                   vii. State of Tennessee Draft Report – Lodging Taxes
                   viii. PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP - Economic Significant of Meetings Study
                    ix. Piper Jaffray – Convention Center Expansion and Hotel Projects
          b. EDD
                      i. Cultural Arts Division 2017 Funding Matrix
                     ii. Department website
          c. PARD
                      i. Annual Report 2016
                     ii. HOT Spending Plan and Memo
          d. Austin Center for Events
                      i. Special Events Alternative Funding Report
                     ii. Center’s website
    4. Additional Information from ACVB
          a. Estimated Economic Impact Calculator – 2016 Event
          b. Economic Impact – Research Reports
          c. JD Power Report, Study Exec Summary, Study
          d. Texas Tourism and MSA
          e. Destination Marketing Organization (DMO) Study
          f. Official response to Citizen Communication letter
Several citizens representing themselves, various interests, and stakeholder groups also attended the VITF
meetings. Each VITF meeting included time allotted for Citizen’s Communication. Speakers also provided
information to the VITF that was posted on the website, including:
    1. Downtown Grids Image
    2. Think Big Presentation
    3. Barton Springs Conservancy Presentation
    4. Parks & Historic Preservation Tourism Presentation
    5. Palm School Preservation
    6. The Austin Music Plan
    7. The 12 Immutable Laws of the Universe
    8. Letter to Council and City Manager and City Management Response
    9. Project Consideration
    10. April 24, 2017 Citizen Communication Handouts
            a. African American Resource Advisory Commission
            b. Convention Center Expansion/Industry
            c. Preservation Austin
            d. Austin Independent Business Alliance
            e. Austin History Center Association
            f. Friends of the Parks of Austin
    11. May 2, 2017 Citizen Communication Handout
    12. Design Commission recommendation
    13. May 23, 2017 Citizen Communication letter

                                                                                              12 | P a g e
Key Findings
Review of Texas Tax Code Chapter 351 and allowable uses of Hotel Occupancy
Taxes
The State of Texas authorizes hotel occupancy tax (HOT) assessments under Chapter 351 of the Texas Tax Code
and under Chapter 334 of the Texas Local Government Code.
Chapter 351 requires HOT assessed under this chapter must first meet the criteria of promoting tourism and
convention and hotel industry, and also fall into one of the authorized categories, not all of which are applicable
to Austin. Those categories allowable in Austin include:

                the acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping,
                 repairing, operation, and maintenance of convention center facilities or visitor
                 information centers, or both;
                the furnishing of facilities, personnel, and materials for the registration of convention
                 delegates or registrants;
                advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to attract tourists and
                 convention delegates or registrants to the municipality or its vicinity;
                the encouragement, promotion, improvement, and application of the arts, including
                 instrumental and vocal music, dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture,
                 design and allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion
                 pictures, radio, television, tape and sound recording, and other arts related to the
                 presentation, performance, execution, and exhibition of these major art forms;
                historical restoration and preservation projects or activities or advertising and conducting
                 solicitations and promotional programs to encourage tourists and convention delegates
                 to visit preserved historic sites or museums:
                      o   at or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities or visitor information
                          centers; or
                      o   located elsewhere in the municipality or its vicinity that would be frequented by
                          tourists and convention delegates;
                signage directing the public to sights and attractions that are visited frequently by hotel
                 guests in the municipality;

Chapter 351 prohibits HOT use for general government activities.
Chapter 334 requires HOT assessed under this chapter be spent only on venues that are approved by voters.
Authorized venues applicable to Austin include convention center, arena, coliseum, stadium, and potentially a
tourism development along an inland waterway.


                                                                                                      13 | P a g e
Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
Key Findings (continued)
The maximum combined HOT allowed for most Texas cities, including Austin, is 17%. Included in that
percentage is the State’s portion of the assessment of 6%.
There were several bills introduced at the Texas State Legislature affecting HOT during the 2017 Legislative
Session. A number of those bills sought to change how HOT can be used, including increasing the maximum
Chapter 351 HOT assessment that can be spent on promotion of arts from 15% to 19.30%, allowing Chapter
334 HOT to be used on parkland, and creating an allowable use of HOT for costs associated with homeless
issues. No bills ultimately passed that expanded how Austin can use HOT.

Review of current uses of Hotel Occupancy Taxes and the impact of those activities
and expenditures on tourism in the City

Austin Tourism
The Office of the Governor’s latest Economic Impact of Travel on Texas report (2015) includes the following:
        The multi-billion dollar travel industry in Texas is a vital part of the state and local economies. The
        industry is represented primarily by retail and service firms, including lodging establishments,
        restaurants, retail stores, gasoline service stations, and other types of businesses that sell their
        products and services to travelers. The money that visitors spend on various goods and services while
        in Texas produces business receipts at these firms, which in turn, employ Texas residents and pay their
        wages and salaries. State and local government units benefit from travel as well, primarily in the form
        of excise taxes on the goods and services purchased by visitors.

    Source: https://travel.texas.gov/tti/media/PDFs/TXImp15pRev2_1.pdf , 2016, pg. 6


The report also includes the following for Austin:




    Source: https://travel.texas.gov/tti/media/PDFs/TXImp15pRev2_1.pdf , 2016, pg. 118




                                                                                                  14 | P a g e
Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
Key Findings (continued)
The Tourism/Visitor Industry is part of the Leisure and Hospitality Industry, which is the 3 rd largest employment
sector in Austin, employing over 127,000. This industry employs Austin residents from all parts of the City.
Analyzing a subset of hospitality
workers (food service workers
across the City) depicts how
industry      employees      are
dispersed across the city in
terms of worker’s place of
residence, and is shown in the
image to the right.       Similar
distributions exist when looking
at downtown hotel workers and
relevant City employees as well.




                                                              Source: Visit Austin (aka Austin Convention and Visitors Bureau)


Austin’s Hotel Occupancy Tax
The City of Austin currently assesses 15% HOT, made up of 6% for the State, 9% for the City. Of the City’s 9%,
7% is assessed under Chapter 351, and 2% is assessed under Chapter 334. The additional 2% HOT capacity,
which would take the combined rate to the maximum 17% allowed by law, is available to either the City for
expansion of the convention center under Chapter 351, or the County for a voter-approved venue under
Chapter 334.
Chapter 351 limits the spending on promotion of arts to 15% of the Chapter 351 portion of the assessment.
The City of Austin currently allocated the maximum 15% of its Chapter 351 assessment to the promotion of the
arts. (Any additional arts-related uses would require use of the current arts allocation, unless expansion of
convention center is pursued using Ch 351 additional tax financing.) Chapter 351 also limits spending on
historic preservation to 15% of the Chapter 351 portion of the assessment. The City of Austin currently does
not allocate a full 15% to historic preservation activities. In Fiscal Year 2016, heritage grant awards totaled
$212,075, which is 0.31% of the Chapter 351 HOT tax collected for the year.
The portion of the Chapter 351 HOT allocation for the Convention Center is pledged to related debt and further
governed by bond covenants. The Chapter 334 HOT assessed for the voter-approved venue Convention Center
Expansion/Waller Creek Tunnel Project is also pledged to related debt and further governed by bond
covenants. The Chapter 334 venue HOT is set to expire in 2029 when the debt is scheduled to be paid off.
The current allocation is outlined in City Code Chapter 11-2. The allocations in percentages, as described in
City Code, and cents (% times 7 cent assessment) are depicted in the charts on the following page. The 2 %
venue assessment is a stand-alone assessment in City Code.



                                                                                                         15 | P a g e
Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
Key Findings (continued)




                                                        (Cents)




            Source: City of Austin Code of Ordinances




                                  (Cents)




        Source: City of Austin Code of Ordinances




                                                                                       16 | P a g e
Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
Key Findings (continued)
Convention Center
The Convention Center HOT allocation is used for debt service payments, convention center operations, and
capital improvement projects (CIP). Annual debt services payments are between $15-$20 million. None of
the Convention Center requirements (i.e. costs) are covered by the City’s general fund.
As of January 2017, Convention Center total principal outstanding was $133,991,000, made up of the following
debt issuances:

o Series 2013 - $14,115,000
o Series 2012 - $16,995,000
o Series 2008 - $87,820,000 (variable rate)
o GO Debt - $15,061,000


The Convention Center operating budget covers costs associated with events, facilities, and administration.
The distribution across those areas is as follows:




The Austin Convention Center Department Approved Budget requirements for Fiscal Year 2017 total $102.2
million. The Austin Convention Center Operating portion of that total is $63 million.

                                                                                               17 | P a g e
Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
Key Findings (continued)
The Austin Convention Center Department cash funds over 95% of its normal/on-going capital improvement
projects (i.e. non-expansion projects typical of a facility of its type, such as elevator/escalator refurbishment,
roof replacement/repair, technology upgrades, parking facility repairs, modernization of meeting space). This
is vastly different than nearly all other City departments, who rely heavily on debt financing for their capital
improvement projects. The City utilizes a 5-year CIP plan and Council approves annual CIP appropriation for
multi-year projects at the same time the operating budget is approved. The Fiscal Year 2016 CIP plan included
$37 million in identified capital improvement projects. The continued success of convention center operations
requires that the facilities remain in a sellable/desirable condition. Therefore, deferred maintenance of the
facilities is not an option. Adequate funding for capital improvement projects is a significant component of the
Austin Convention Center Department operations.
The estimated return on investment (ROI) of the Austin Convention Center’s HOT allocation is best determined
when considered along with the HOT allocation for convention sales from the Austin Convention and Visitors
Bureau, as the two entities partner to bring events to Austin. The estimated combined ROI of over 275% is
highlighted on page 19.


Cultural Arts
The Cultural Arts Division of the
Economic Development Department
manages the cultural arts funding
allocation of HOT. Annually, a panel
reviews the applications submitted by
arts organizations and awards cultural
grants using certain set parameters
and matrix scoring. The funding plan
seeks      to    support     equitable
distribution,     and      categorizes
applicants according to size of
budgets so that, while larger
organizations receive larger dollar
amounts, they receive a smaller
percentage of their budget than do
smaller organizations.      The total
cultural arts allocation for FY 2017
was $11.6 million. The maximum
award for FY 2017 was $210,000 and
the minimum award amount was
$1,000.      Grants were awarded to
nearly 500 organizations in FY 2017.
The funding plan summary for FY
2016 and FY 2017 is shown in the
table on the right.                        Source: City of Austin Economic Development Department




                                                                                                     18 | P a g e
Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
Key Findings (continued)
The investment of HOT for the promotion of cultural arts shows a positive return on that investment. Utilizing
a 2012 study of the Austin Creative Sector Economic Impact, the estimated direct impact ROI of the not-for-
profit creative sector (which closely mirrors the City’s Cultural Arts HOT program) is 156%. The ROI is calculated
from the output and value-added inputs included in the following table.
                                                                                         The economic impact of the not-for-
                                                                                         profit creative sector provides an
                                                                                         estimated direct ROI of 156%
                                                                                         (based on output and value-added),
                                                                                         which is even higher than the
                                                                                         estimated direct ROI of 92% for the
                                                                                         total sector. Both estimates are
                                                                                         positive results for the Austin
                                                                                         economy, and the non-for-profit
                                                                                         estimate most closely aligns with
                                                                                         the City’s Cultural Arts HOT
                                                                                         program.
 Source: City of Austin Economic Development Department




Austin Convention and Visitors Bureau
The Austin Convention and Visitors Bureau (ACVB), now known as Visit Austin, is the official sales and marketing
partner of the Austin Convention Center, and markets Austin as a destination. Visit Austin/ACVB’s main areas
of focus include: Convention Sales and Services, Marketing, Film Commission, and Public Relations and
Communications. Visit Austin/ACVB’s marketing efforts focus on Austin as an overall destination, segment
niche areas of heritage/diversity, art/culture, adventure, and international markets. ACVB utilizes music in
much of its marketing efforts, booking musicians for both conventions and marketing tours, as well as
facilitating booking musicians for events. Visit Austin/ACVB also administers a heritage grant program. Key
metrics and information representing ACVBs performance are below and on the following pages.
The reported estimated economic impact of $673M related to ACVB bookings (shown below), relates to $285M
in estimated economic impact of the events ACVB booked for the Convention Center.

                                                                      Based on the estimated direct economic impact of
                                                                      $285 million for FY 2016, when adding ACVB’s HOT
                                                                      allocation to the Convention Center’s, the combined
                                                                      HOT investment of convention center bookings
                                                                      results in a conservative estimated return on that
                                                                      investment (ROI) of over 275% for the Austin
                                                                      economy. This is a minimum estimate, as it does not
                                                                      include ACVB’s tourism marketing impact, or the
                                                                      economic impact of events booked directly by the
                                                                      Convention Center. This estimate also does not
                                                                      include the impact from indirect or induced spending
                                                                      tied to direct spending.
Source: Visit Austin (aka Austin Convention and Visitors Bureau)

                                                                                                     19 | P a g e
Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
     Key Findings (continued)




                                                                                            20 | P a g e
     Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
Source: Visit Austin (aka Austin Convention and Visitors Bureau)
Key Findings (continued)




 Source: Visit Austin (aka Austin Convention and Visitors Bureau)

Additional Heritage Tourism Information
In a 2015 report on the Economic Impact of Historic Preservation in Texas by the University of Texas at Austin
and Rutgers, the significance of heritage-related travel is discussed. The report notes that “more than 10.5
percent of all travel in Texas is heritage-related” and “heritage tourists contribute about 12.5% of total visitor
spending in Texas”. The report also connects heritage preservation to nearly 80,000 jobs in Texas. As discussed
in a subsequent section, in the Austin-Round Rock MSA, approximately 28% of visitors enjoyed cultural
activities while visiting the area, irrespective of the purpose of their trip. Of those 28%, just over 10% enjoyed
concerts/theater/dance, just over 8% enjoyed touring/sightseeing, and just under 8% visited historic sites.




                                                                                                     21 | P a g e
Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
Key Findings (continued)
Additional Historic Preservation Activities
During adoption of the FY 2017
budget,     Council    directed
additional funding be used for
historic preservation activities
from the allocation historically
provided to ACVB.        Council
increased the allocation to the
heritage     grant     program
administered by ACVB from
$200,000 to $500,000.         In
addition, Council allocated
nearly $1 million for historic
preservation projects within the
City’s Parks and Recreation
Department (PARD). PARD has
identified several projects, as
                                        Source: City of Austin Parks and Recreation Department
shown to the right.
Short-term Rental Activity
Short-term rentals (STRs) or Vacation rental by owner (VRBOs) are also required to collect and remit hotel
occupancy tax on qualified rentals. The City also requires STRs and VRBOs to register with the City’s Austin
Code Department annually. Austin Code and the City’s Controller’s Office share information about hotel
occupancy taxpayers to ensure that registered taxpayers have an STR license and the all registered STR taxes
are paid.
Over the last three fiscal years, STRs hotel tax collections have represented approximately 3% of the City’s total
hotel occupancy tax collections.

Review of State and
National best practices
for tourism programs

Texas’ major cities utilize HOT
in similar ways, but each city
does employ slightly different
business models for its
convention center operations
and variations in their
respective HOT allocations
(shown to the right).




                                       Source: City of Austin Convention Center Department

                                                                                                     22 | P a g e
Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
Key Findings (continued)
Every city researched funds its Convention Center and a Convention and Visitors Bureau with a portion of its
HOT, as does Austin.
El Paso assesses the highest HOT rate in the state at 17.5%, and is the only city in the state that is allowed to
go above the 17% max rate. El Paso allocates 13.5% to arts, and combines the funds with general funds to
support art-related activities.
San Antonio assesses a HOT rate of 16.75%, and includes a County venue assessment. All of the City of San
Antonio’s HOT is pledged to debt, with the allocation to the remaining uses calculated on the net available
after debt service (i.e. the 15% allocation of the net HOT to arts and historic preservation results in an allocation
a less than 15%).
State Laws governing hotel occupancy tax vary from state to state, making comparisons across state lines
difficult and less meaningful. A draft report from the State of Tennessee examined how lodging taxes differ
across states. With regards to how states differ in terms of authorizing lodging taxes for cities and counties,
the draft report notes:
o Forty-three states authorize lodging taxes for at least some cities or counties.
o Most (37 of the 43) do so by general law for either all cities or all counties—21 authorize both—
  and usually up to a certain rate—though many make exceptions to the standard rate limit for
  specific, individual jurisdictions.
o Iowa and Texas generally cap rates at 7%; cities in Wisconsin are allowed to go to 8% with a
  referendum.
o A small number of states have no caps and allow rates to be set at the local level, either by the
  legislative body adopting the tax or by referendum, including seven that authorize local lodging
  taxes for cities generally (Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Nebraska, and Oregon),
  three of which (Alaska, California, and Oregon) grant similar authority to counties.
o In Tennessee and four others (Louisiana, Mississippi, New York, and North Carolina), most local
  governments must have specific, individual authorization from their state legislature to adopt a
  new lodging tax or increase the authorized rate for an existing lodging tax.
o Twenty-eight states including Tennessee allow city and county taxes to overlap.
    Source: https://www.tn.gov/assets/entities/tacir/attachments/2015OctoberTab6HotelMotelTax.pdf, 2015, pg. 20

The draft report also describes differences among states in terms of earmarking lodging taxes, stating:
o With few exceptions, general earmarks of lodging tax revenue in other states are tied to general
  authorizations to impose local lodging taxes.
o Of the 33 states with general local-lodging-tax authorizations for cities, counties or both, only 13
  earmark all of the revenue, 14 earmark a portion of it, and 6 do not earmark any of it.
o Missouri grants local authority only to certain categories of cities and counties with certain
  exceptions and earmarks all of the revenue.
o Michigan, Nevada, and Texas similarly limit authority to certain categories and earmark a portion
  of the revenue. The amount earmarked varies from 25% to 100% or applies only to revenue
  collected from rates above a certain level.
    Source: https://www.tn.gov/assets/entities/tacir/attachments/2015OctoberTab6HotelMotelTax.pdf, 2015, pg. 4



                                                                                                         23 | P a g e
Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
Key Findings (continued)
Study the impact of tourism on City infrastructure, services, and facilities
A review of the State’s Tourism Impact Report shows that HOT makes up 41% of the visitor-related local tax
contribution. Besides HOT, the visitor-related local tax contribution includes sales tax, alcohol beverage tax,
passenger facility charges, as shown in the
illustration on the right.
Further analysis of the current visitor-related
local tax contribution estimates that over
$40 million goes to the City’s general fund in
the form of sales tax, alcohol beverage tax,
etc. General fund costs directly tied to
tourism cannot be readily identified/
quantified, as further discussed next. A
preliminary review of Austin’s general fund
costs most related to tourism identified
approximately $20 million in costs. This
preliminary analysis did not include an
allocation of the costs between residents and
non-residents. Thus, the $20 million in
identified costs represents the total costs for
those budget line items, not just a portion
attributable to visitors.                                  Source: City of Austin Convention Center Department
This information is illustrated below.




            Source: City of Austin Convention Center Department, City of Austin Financial System



                                                                                                           24 | P a g e
Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
Key Findings (continued)
Quantifying a cost to a city from visitors is very difficult – no study or estimate was identified and a calculation
was not attempted by the VITF. A search for similar studies did find a discussion regarding the challenges in
determining the cost on a city from tourism. The topic is discussed in a Florida Report written by a PhD with
Florida TaxWatch Research Institute, Inc. The report found that current data suitable for a comprehensive
cost-benefit analysis was not available, and included the following in Appendix B of the report:
        Florida TaxWatch’s search for timely, Florida-specific cost-benefit tourism data reveals that tourism
        studies and related data collection efforts by-and-large have been directed more toward the benefit
        rather than the cost side of the equation.

        Florida TaxWatch’s search for tourism cost-benefit data also reveals that, although benefits are visible
        in the form of jobs, earnings, business output, and tax revenues, explicit data with which to measure
        costs are relatively invisible or indistinguishable from other cost-related impacts. This is because they
        tend to meld with, and are difficult to separate from, more general social and quality-of-life factors.
        Traffic congestion, health care needs and costs, public safety, and similar issues are all part of
        Floridians’ daily lives. To what extent these are increased by tourists to the state is difficult to isolate.

        A Florida household government benefits and tax burden study conducted for Florida TaxWatch by
        Drs. Keith G. Baker and Craig E. Reese shows that Florida tourists consume/use far less government
        services than do Florida residents in a variety of government services arenas.

    Source: http://www.floridataxwatch.org/resources/pdf/tourismreportmarch2006.pdf , 2006, pgs. 34-35

Review of current tourist activity in the City of Austin and what events, venues, or
facilities those tourists attend while visiting

As the “Live Music Capital of
the World”, Austin’s music
scene is a draw for tourists.
The City’s current cultural arts
program funded by HOT
provides funding for certain
music organizations, but the
requirement that the recipient
be a non-profit organization
currently      keeps      many
musicians and music venues
from being eligible for any
funding.
Austin     also    has    many
attractions and amenities that
are popular among tourists.
Many of these attractions are
PARD assets. Barton Springs
pool is one of those assets, with an estimated 16% of the visitors to the pool being non-residents. PARD has


                                                                                                         25 | P a g e
Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
      Key Findings (continued)
      identified several of its historical assets that are visited by tourists, many of which have needs that could be
      eligible for HOT funding under the historic preservation category of Ch 351.
      An overview of Austin-Round Rock MSA visitors for 2015 is shown on the previous page.
      Visitors come to Austin for many reasons. A summary of the purpose for visits to the Austin-Round Rock MSA
      in 2015 is below.




      Reported visitors coming to the area for meetings, seem to be in line with a national study that analyzed the
      economic impact of the meetings industry. In that study completed in 2014 by PricewaterhouseCoopers, LLP
      (PwC), found that the meetings sector generates approximately 15% of the direct tourism output of the Travel
      and Tourism industry. Additional information about the PwC study is included below.




Source: http://www.eventscouncil.org/Files/2012%20ESS/CIC%20Meetings%20ESS%20Update%20EXECUTIVE%20SUMMARY-FINAL.pdf , 2014, p6

                                                                                                         26 | P a g e
      Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
  Key Findings (continued)




Source: http://www.eventscouncil.org/Files/2012%20ESS/CIC%20Meetings%20ESS%20Update%20EXECUTIVE%20SUMMARY-FINAL.pdf , 2014, p8

  Visitors to Austin-Round Rock MSA in 2015 took part in a variety of activities while they were in the area in
  2015, irrespective of the purpose of their visit.




                                                                                                    27 | P a g e
  Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
Key Findings (continued)
Visit Austin/ACVB includes information about Austin’s amenities on its website, including information about
Austin’s cultural, heritage, and outdoor offerings. Images of areas highlighted on Visit Austin/ACVBs site are
below.




 Source: Visit Austin (aka Austin Convention and Visitors Bureau)




                                                                                                 28 | P a g e
Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
Key Findings (continued)
Review the Austin Convention Center expansion, all possible design options and
potential funding mechanisms
Austin Convention Center is the smallest in size among its competitors, as shown in the chart below.




                                                    Source: Visit Austin (aka Austin Convention and Visitors Bureau)
Additional key information regarding the Austin Convention Center includes:
   The Austin Convention Center opened in1992 and was last expanded in 2002.
   Many competitors have recently completed expansion or are currently considering expansion.
   Half of Austin Convention Center’s lost business is due to lack of availability or inadequate space.
   Austin Convention Center is at practical maximum capacity at 65% occupancy.
   An independent consulting team studied ACC expansion and considered 5 options, including no expansion,
    complete relocation, and expansion to the east, south, and west of the current facility. The consulting
    team recommended expansion to the west.
   Urban Land Institute, an organization providing leadership in responsible land use related to complex land
    use planning and development projects, programs, and policies, also reviewed the consultant’s report and
    agreed with their expansion recommendation.
Two main HOT funding concepts have been proposed by Austin Convention Center staff for expansion – one
under Ch. 334 and another under Ch. 351. The Ch. 351 concept has variations of both % of addition Ch. 351
HOT and duration of current Ch 334 Venue.


                                                                                                       29 | P a g e
Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
    Key Findings (continued)
    Multiple financing concepts are available for expansion of the Austin Convention Center – expansion/extension
    of Ch 334 venue, if voter approved, or increasing Ch 351 up to 2% more. The option selected determines
    possibilities for expansion components and the potential for other annual funding available for other allowable
    uses.
    A review of financing of several other convention centers shows that many convention centers are financed
    with hotel tax as well as portions of other taxes, surcharges, fees, such as sales tax, alcohol beverage tax, and
    rental car tax. Austin currently has a separate Vehicle Rental Car Tax venue in place until 2029. Any use of a
    portion of sales tax or alcohol beverage tax would divert those revenues away from the City’s general fund.
    The various financing sources for some of the nation’s large convention centers are highlighted below.




Source: http://www.conventioncentertaskforce.org/resources/presentations/TF%20Present%20June%2015%202009-PiperJaffey.pdf , 2009, p 9-10

                                                                                                             30 | P a g e
    Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
Key Findings (continued)
The Austin Convention Center Department has continued to seek and receive stakeholder input on its proposed
expansion. The desire for a walkable, street-activated facility that includes community space, restaurant/retail
space, and development of area/convention center district improvements have been communicated by
numerous Austin residents and groups. The conceptual design of a proposed expansion continues to evolve.
Actual design of an expanded facility and area improvements would occur following Council approval to move
forward with the plan, should Council decide to do so. The financing concept selected would ultimately
determine what components could be part of the project.

Any details regarding land acquisition – either through acquisition, ground lease, or another alternate method
– are also still to be determined. ACCD does not believe that it should be a foregone conclusion that the
property will be fully removed from the tax rolls, and believes one acquisition option that should be explored
is through a long-term lease versus a purchase. There is also potential for additional development components
within the expansion design, depending on the land acquisition method and/or a development agreement that
could have significant impacts on
the analysis, but are unknowns at
this point. There is also potential
for a new downtown fire station
and another Austin Energy chiller
to be incorporated into the
expansion      design,     meeting
important needs of the City that
have not identified other solution
options.

In addition, financing with
additional tax assessed under Ch.
351 has the potential for
additional funding being available
each year for other authorized
uses. An example of one of the
Ch. 351 financing illustrations is
shown to the right. The elements
described are for illustration
purposes only. The ultimate
project components and flow of
fund components will continue to
be defined through stakeholder
input, Council direction, and
architectural design.




                                     Source: City of Austin Convention Center Department
                                                                                                   31 | P a g e
Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
Key Findings (continued)
Conceptual images representing expansion elements of interest by stakeholders are below.




Source: City of Austin Convention Center Department                                        32 | P a g e
Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
Key Findings (continued)
Consideration of the creation of a Tourism Public Improvement District

The Council Resolution directed the City Manager to begin conversations with the downtown hotels related to
the creation of a Tourism Public Improvement District (TPID), which could be a potential mechanism used for
the expansion of the Austin Convention Center or any other uses allowed under state law regarding a TPID.


The Task Force also studied the Tourism Public Improvement District, and as it relates to Austin, noted the
following:

       Operation of City public safety departments (Police, Fire, EMS) consumes a majority (almost 70%) of
        general fund revenue.
       To support tourism, especially during peak times such as South by Southwest and F1, there is a need
        to provide additional public safety services, which result in increased costs to the City’s general fund,
        some of which are not reimbursed by the event holders.
       Upon formation of a TPID, the annual TPID spending plan could include an annual concession provided
        to the City.
             o The City could use this funding for an agreed to purpose between the City and the hoteliers.
             o This funding commitment would need to be reflected in the 10-year TPID service plan that is
                 part of the petition that is approved by the hoteliers within the District, and then presented
                 to the City Council for approval.
                       For example, if the City wanted to use the annual concession from the District for
                          public safety costs related to city wide tourism events (e.g.; SXSW), it would be
                          permissible to include this expenditure under the statutory category for related
                          public safety costs under the Public Improvement District statutes.


Additional Topic Covered by Task Force – Welcome Centers

As noted previously, an allowable use of HOT is for a visitor information center. Visit Austin currently operates
the Austin Visitor Center located at 602 E. Fourth Street. The Austin Visitor Center offers visitor information,
shopping, and tours.
There may be other opportunities for welcome centers in Austin for tourists to obtain information about
Austin’s attractions. One such possible location is at Zilker Park near Barton Springs Pool, where many out-of-
town visitors frequent. This center could educate visitors about the heritage, natural history, and eco-system
of Barton Springs, as well as serve as a point of orientation for other City parks.




                                                                                                     33 | P a g e
Note: Key Findings section represents data provided to the Visitor Impact Task Force
Detailed Recommendations

     Overarching Recommendations:
           o With regard to all uses of the Hotel Occupancy Tax, equity should be considered and funding
               should be inclusive and reflect the diversity of this community, with inclusive consideration
               for under-served areas and under-represented communities.
           o Sustainability practices should be considered in the expansion of the Convention Center so
               that community values and input are included in the process and put into practice.
                     Visit Austin should conduct a dialogue with community stakeholders, the
                        Environmental Commission, and the Joint Sustainability Committee on the
                        “greening” and sustainability practices of the tourism industry.
     The Visitor Impact Task Force recommends expansion of the Austin Convention Center (ACC)
      following the consultant’s recommended option to the West, non-contiguous (leaving Trinity Street
      open), IF:
           o Financing concept 2b, increasing the Ch. 351 Hotel Occupancy Tax (HOT) by 2%, and retiring
               the current debt as soon as possible (estimated in the year 2021) is utilized, and
           o The City seeks land acquisition through a long-term ground lease, or some other
               development agreement, that provides for the land and any additional development to
               remain on the tax roll. More specifically:
                     Expanding the Convention Center should be integrated with other uses, such as
                        street-level restaurant/retail space in order to activate the area, and residential
                        (including affordable housing) and/or office, with the possibility of reducing project
                        costs.
                     The City should issue a Request for Information for integrating the expansion of the
                        Convention Center with other uses that would contribute to street activity and a
                        healthy urban fabric in downtown’s southeast quadrant while maintaining the city’s
                        intact street grid and valuable land and development on the property tax rolls for
                        the benefit of the entire City.
                     The Convention Center expansion should be used to repair the urban framework in
                        the immediate vicinity of the convention center. Improvements should include
                        those described in the Waller Creek Conservancy vision for the Convention Center
                        are as well as the Red River Cultural District and pedestrian connections between the
                        Convention Center and the Rainey Street neighborhood.
                     Through the Waller Creek Tax Increment Financing District and/or a similar
                        mechanism, additional property tax revenues from the expansion should be
                        considered to address urgent social problems in this area of downtown.
           o Involve the Design Commission and the community in ongoing conversations about the
               design of the expansion, and
           o The expansion project includes additional allowable area improvements that are important
               to the community (to be finally determined as project moves forward, but should consider
               capital improvements involving acquisition and development of Palm School, improvements
               to: Waller Creek (in conjunction with the WallerCreek Conservancy), Mexican-American
               Cultural Center, Red River Cultural District, nearby historic landmarks, etc.), and




                                                                                                 34 | P a g e
Detailed Recommendations (continued)
         o  The bond covenants include in the Flow of Funds direction that excess funds remaining after
            debt service and convention center operations and capital funding, as outlined in the funding
            illustrations, be utilized for:
                  Funds for allowable uses related to commercial music, up the maximum allowed by
                      law, while leaving the current 15% allocation of the 7% Ch. 351 HOT for the current
                      Cultural Arts Funding, and
                  Funds for historic preservation, up the maximum allowed by law, and
                  Excess funding should be split 50/50 between the music and historic preservation
                      uses until the allocation to music reaches the maximum allowed by law (15% of the
                      additional 2% Ch. 351 assessment), at which point funding in excess of that music
                      threshold will be allocated to historic preservation. Should funding ever exceed the
                      maximum allowed for historic preservation, Council should evaluate the need for
                      allocations to additional allowable uses.
    Music/Arts
        o Consider the following for the Economic Development Department’s Cultural Arts Division
            grant program:
                  Marketing/Access/Outreach
                             Website - Grants Funding page(s) more user friendly. There should be a
                              video (2-3 minutes) on the landing page that explains each grant. Each grant
                              program also needs a video (2-3 minutes), and graphics explaining
                              regulations, deadlines, details.
                             Enhanced Community Outreach/Marketing - Dedicated interactive
                              monthly outreach events to under-served communities that includes
                              previous recipients as presenters: arts organizations, musicians, artists.
                              Grant videos should be screened at these meetings.
                             Marketing - Increased visibility in under-served community via targeted
                              outreach campaign. Make materials more relevant visually and culturally
         o   Consider the following for use of a portion of the additional funding allocated to music from
             the convention center expansion funding:
                    Grant Funding
                         Artist-as-Entrepreneur (Core Funding) - Austin musicians and artists add
                             tremendous value to culture, and even further, to economic growth in the
                             ‘Live Music Capital.’ There are artists in Austin building careers outside of
                             performance on stage that can ultimately develop their creative ventures
                             into larger economic engines, fueling tourism in new markets - beyond
                             traditional, historic locales. These business-oriented artists need greater
                             opportunity to develop their ideas, and access to increased resources.
                             Funding preference to ideas and plans that stimulate growth, and develop
                             tourism opportunities in under-served communities.
                         Specific funding to expand and develop individual artists that are building
                             successful arts ventures with a history of growth
                              Incubator ($2,000-$10,000) - business with 1-2-year history. Funding
                                  delivery includes mentorship.



                                                                                             35 | P a g e
Detailed Recommendations (continued)
                                  Growth ($10,000-$25,000) - business with 3-5-year history, proven
                                   growth, and strategic plan. Funding delivery includes mentorship.
                               Expansion ($25,000-$100,000) - 5-7-year history, previous funding from
                                   CAD, clear community
                                   partnerships/investment. Funding delivery includes mentorship.
                             Artists’ receiving funding in Growth and Expansion phases must become
                              mentors as a stipulation of their participation in the program.
                             Each funding level can only be received once per artist.

    Historic Preservation Activities should be amended as follows:
         o   Transfer administration of the Historic Preservation and Heritage Grant program from the
             ACVB to a non-profit (i.e. Austin Community Foundation) or City department with an advisory
             board composed of a broad and inclusive set of stakeholders representing a variety of historic
             preservation, cultural heritage, and tourism interests. Look to other grant programs as a
             model including the Texas Historical Commission’s Texas Preservation Trust Fund (TPTF), and
             History Colorado’s State Historical Fund (SHF).

         o   Maintain percentage funding levels from HOT revenues for the Cultural Arts grant program
             and ACVB Tourism Promotion Fund.

         o   Revise eligibility and grant administration guidelines while retaining consistency with State
             law and City Code:
                  Remove the requirement that three bids be received for all work. For much historic
                     preservation-related restoration and rehabilitation work there may not be three
                     contractors or tradespeople available locally with the skills and experience to carry
                     out specialized work, and for multi-phase work it can be more efficient to contract
                     with the same architects and tradespeople as in earlier phases.
                  Eliminate the cap on the maximum amount for individual grants. This serves multiple
                     purposes: 1) increases efficiency for grant recipients by reducing the time spent on
                     grant-writing; 2) allows funds to be used on higher impact projects with larger
                     budget needs; 3) reduces the number of times an individual property owner has to
                     return to the grant program for funding, 4) allows for large restoration/rehabilitation
                     projects to be completed in a more timely and cost-efficient manner.
                  Allow for funding of privately-owned properties that are regularly open to the public
                     (e.g. commercial properties). Other publicly-funded grant programs provide funding
                     to privately-owned properties including the TPTF and SHF programs. Establish grant
                     scoring criteria and guidelines that put a higher burden on private, commercial grant
                     recipients than on non-profit and public recipients. The funding can serve as an
                     incentive for property owners in areas such as East Sixth Street, or the Red River
                     District to make improvements to their historic buildings that make them more
                     attractive to tourists, alleviates development pressures on those historic resources,
                     and also benefits the community. (If market factors in the future make low-interest
                     loans more attractive to privately-owned, commercial properties, strongly
                     encourage that City Council consider establishing a loan program in lieu of grants for
                     these types of projects.)
                  Establish grant scoring criteria to favor properties owned by public and non-profit
                     entities, projects that impact culturally-significant historic sites that have been



                                                                                               36 | P a g e
Detailed Recommendations (continued)
                      under-represented, and entertainment and cultural districts that have the capacity
                      to attract a more diverse tourist audience.
                  Establish grant scoring criteria to encourage funding to assist sites to be more
                      “visitor-ready”, or that attract tourists to areas that have not traditionally served
                      tourists. This can diversify Austin’s tourism options and better tell all the stories of
                      our community’s heritage.
                  Expand the type of projects eligible for funding to include interior work, building
                      systems, interpretive signage, etc.
                  Look to other grant programs as a model for eligible scopes of work, selection
                      processes, and restrictions based upon the type of grant recipient including the TPTF
                      and SHF.
                  Remove any caps on the amount of grant funds that can be provided toward a
                      specific site or total project cost at a site.
         o   Establish % of revenue from HOT associated with the expansion of the Austin Convention
             Center (plan 2b) or from a Tourism Public Improvement District to be dedicated to a Historic
             Preservation and Heritage Grant Program.

         o   Prior to any expansion of the HOT tax due to ACC or TPID, continue to allocate $1.5 million to
             a Historic Preservation and Heritage Grant Program. Until ACC expansion is creating
             additional 2 percent, would come out of Tourism Promotion, but if/when expansion and/or
             TPID approved, funds would come from waterfall dollars.

    Visit Austin
          o Establish a Marketing Advisory Committee that would meet quarterly and include local small
              business groups (i.e. Red River Cultural District and Austin Independent Business Alliance
              (AIBA)), arts and cultural organizations, under-represented community stakeholders, and
              other impacted stakeholders to advise and collaborate with Visit Austin on tourism marketing
              plans and diversity tourism.
          o Visit Austin should continue to support the areas of cultural, heritage, music and local
              business and develop marketing efforts to support robust tourism plans in each of those
              areas.


    Tourism Public Improvement District (TPID)
        o The City Council should begin the process of formation of a TPID with the hotel industry at
             the maximum allowable rate amenable to the industry, mindful of the potential hotel
             occupancy tax rate changes as the convention center debt/venue tax is retired and the HOT
             rate returns to an overall 15 percent rate.
        o The City Council should direct staff to identify specific ways the City can use TPID dollars to
             offset public safety and business district infrastructure costs associated with tourism.

    Short-term Rental Tax Collection –
         o The City Council should direct City staff to establish a mechanism to collect HOT directly from
             online marketplaces where transactions occur.




                                                                                                37 | P a g e
Detailed Recommendations (continued)
    Welcome Center –
        o Within the expansion bonding capacity, determine if there is a possibility to provide funding
           (estimated at $5 million) for a Welcome Center, located in Zilker Park near Barton Springs
           Pool, or other qualifying tourist destination areas that promote tourism and the convention
           and hotel industry.
        o In future years, as the additional annual funding available to music and historic preservation
           through the convention center expansion financing flow of funds increases, and the amount
           available for music reaches the 15% maximum, consideration should be given to allocating a
           portion of the excess funding available for historic preservation to costs associated with
           welcome centers located on City-owned property.
        o As funding is assigned to a specific welcome center, the percentage of funding allocated to
           covers costs should be aligned with the percentage of welcome center visitors who are from
           out-of-town.




                                                                                           38 | P a g e
Appendices




             39 | P a g e
Appendix A

Council Resolution 20160818-075

WHEREAS, the City of Austin has become an internationally recognized destination for live music, special
events, parks, culture, food, and history; and

WHEREAS, the City of Austin has been termed the "Live Music Capital of the World"; and

WHEREAS, according to Austin Convention & Visitors Bureau, in 2013 more than 21.5 million people from
around the globe visited Austin; and

WHEREAS, according to the Austin Convention Center Long Range Master Plan, the total Convention
attendance for 2014 was 449,464, approximately 2% of all visitors to Austin; and

WHEREAS, in Fiscal Year 2016/17, it is estimated that visitors will generate more than $90 million in Hotel
Occupancy Taxes which has become the third largest source of tax revenue for the City of Austin; and

WHEREAS, currently the City of Austin uses Hotel Occupancy Taxes for the Austin Convention Center, Austin
Convention & Visitors Bureau, and the Cultural Arts Program; and

WHEREAS, in addition to those departments and programs, other events, activities, districts, and facilities
bring visitors to town and support the tourist industry; and

WHEREAS, the Spring Festivals attract tourists, artists, musicians, professionals and companies from all over
the world; and

WHEREAS, Texas Tax Code, Chapter 351.101 (e) states that "hotel occupancy tax revenue spent for a purpose
authorized by this section may be spent for day-to-day operations, supplies, salaries, office rental, travel
expenses, and other administrative costs" only if those costs are incurred by activities that promote tourism
and the convention and hotel industry and that fit within the authorized uses set out in Texas Tax Code
351.101(a); and

WHEREAS, Zilker Park, which includes Barton Springs, and which is the site for Austin City Limits as well as
other large events, is nationally-recognized as one of the best Urban Park's to visit; and

WHEREAS, the Parks Department markets and supports a number of other facilities and events, including
cultural centers, theaters, and museums, that are attended by tourists and visitors; and

WHEREAS, in 2014, the Zilker Botanical Gardens, the Hillside Theater, Dougherty Arts Center, the Carver
Museum, and O. Henry Museum had total attendance of 423,069; and

WHEREAS, the City of El Paso uses local Hotel Occupancy Taxes to fund the Department of Museums and
Cultural Affairs; and

WHEREAS, with the aggressive expansion of hotel rooms being built, tourists are visiting the City in growing
numbers and therefore total Hotel Occupancy Tax revenues are expected to increase more than $11 million
in Fiscal Year 2016/17; and



                                                                                                40 | P a g e
Appendix A (continued)
WHEREAS, to ensure the effective investment of taxpayer money, reporting data and information on the effect
of each expenditure on tourist activity and economic development is critical; and

WHEREAS, providing public oversight and input regarding both the use of and the effect of the City use of
hotel occupancy tax revenue would ensure public confidence in the City use of tax dollars; NOW, THEREFORE,

BE IT RESOLVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF AUSTIN:
City Council establishes a Visitor Impact Task Force.
     1. The scope of the Task Force shall include:
             • Study the impact of tourism on City infrastructure, services, and facilities, and investigate
                 opportunities to offset those impacts.by using Hotel Occupancy Tax revenues;
             • Review of current uses of Hotel Occupancy Taxes and the impact of those activities and
                 expenditures on tourism in the City;
             • Review of current tourist activity in the City of Austin and what events, venues, or facilities
                 those tourists attend while visiting;
             • Review of State and National best practices for tourism programs;
             • Review of Texas Tax Code Chapter 351 and allowable uses of Hotel Occupancy Taxes under
                 the Tax Code including parks, historic preservation, cultural heritage, music, arts, special
                 events, fee waivers, convention, visitors bureau, transportation, downtown districts, venues
                 and other facilities and debt defeasance for city-owned hotels and convention facilities;
             • Review the Austin Convention Center expansion, all possible design options and potential
                 funding mechanisms; and
             • Make recommendations to the City Council about how to best utilize all hotel occupancy
                 revenue to impact tourism by April 1, 2017.
     2. The Task Force shall be comprised of 18 voting members and two ex officio members appointed by
        the City Council:
        o 2 members of the music industry nominated by the Music Commission;
        o 2 members of the arts community nominated by the Arts Commission;
        o 2 members of the special events industry; one nominated by the Parkland Events Task Force and
             one nominated by the Economic Opportunity Committee;
        o 1 member nominated by the Austin Convention and Visitors Bureau;
        o 1 member of the hotel industry nominated by the Economic Opportunity Committee;
        o 1 member of the public safety community nominated by the Public Safety Commission;
        o 1 member of the preservation community nominated by the Historic Landmark Commission;
        o 1 member of the parks community nominated by the Parks & Recreation Board;
        o 1 member from the Convention Center;
        o 1 member nominated by the Downtown Commission;
        o 2 community members who represent the tourism workforce nominated by the Economic
             Opportunity Committee;
        o 1 community member appointed by the Planning and Neighborhood Committee;
        o 1 member of the environmental community nominated by the Environmental Commission;
        o 1 member representing the restaurant industry nominated by the Economic Opportunity
             Committee;
        o 1 ex officio member from the Public Works Department; and
        o 1 ex officio member from the Austin Transportation Department.
     3. A quorum for the conduct of business is a majority of Task Force members who have been appointed
        by Council. The Task Force shall elect a chair and vice-chair at its first meeting.
     4. The Task Force will be subject to the Open Meetings Act, all meetings will be open to Public, and
        public will be given a reasonable amount of time to provide input.




                                                                                                 41 | P a g e
Appendix A (continued)
    5.  The City Manager shall provide reasonably necessary resources and technical assistance to the Task
       Force.
    6. Any City Council Member may recommend nominees for consideration to the Economic Opportunity
       Committee no later than October 9th 2016.
    7. The City Council shall determine whether to dissolve the Task Force or make it a permanent
       Commission no later than adoption of the Task Force Report or December 31, 2017, whichever occurs
       first.

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED
The City Manager is directed to consider creation of a Parks & Cultural Center Tourism Fund, Special Events
Tourism Fund, and a Historic Preservation Tourism Fund, funded by Hotel Occupancy Taxes.

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED
Should City Council amend City Code to add any new types of expenditure category for Hotel Occupancy Taxes,
the City Manager is directed to provide reporting similar to the reporting for Cultural Arts grants, for the new
types of expenditures.

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED
The City Manager is directed to report back to Council in conjunction with the Visitor Impact Task Force Report
no later than April 1, 2017.

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED
The City Manager is directed to begin conversations with the downtown hotels related to the creation of a
Tourism Public Improvement District (PID), which could be a potential mechanism used for the expansion of
the Austin Convention Center or any other uses allowed under state law regarding a Tourism PID.




                                                                                                   42 | P a g e
Appendix B

Recommendation Discussion Notes

Summary of notes and VITF member submittals utilized during the May 23, 2017 meeting to develop
the recommendations included in the report.

NOTE: The recommendations included in the report represent the VITF’s final approved
recommendations. The information on the following pages was used as a starting point for
discussion, and therefore may differ from the final approved recommendations.

      TPID
          o Whereas, The first item in the Task force scope per council Resolution No.
            20160818-075 reads: “Study the impact of tourism on City infrastructures,
            services, and facilities, and investigate opportunities to offset those impacts by
            using Hotel Occupancy Tax revenues” and
          o Operation of city public safety departments (Police, Fire, EMS) consumes a
            majority (almost 70%) of general fund revenue; and
          o To support tourism, especially during peak times such as South by Southwest
            and F1, there is a need to provide additional public safety services; and
          o Other Texas cities have found legal ways to utilize a TPID to offset public safety
            costs of tourism;
          o Therefore, be it resolved:
          o That the City Council begin the process of the formation of a TPID with the hotel
            industry at the maximum allowable rate amenable to the industry, mindful of
            potential rate changes as the debt/venue tax is retired and 2 cents of the tax
            returns to 15 cents; and
          o The VITF recommends that City Council direct staff to identify specific ways the
            City can use TPID dollars to offset public safety and business district infrastructure
            costs associated with tourism.

      Short term rental tax collection: “Establish a mechanism to collect Hotel Occupancy Tax
       directly from online marketplaces where transactions occur.” Consensus

      Convention Center Expansion 2B++
          o Other projects to be considered for inclusion as part of expansion (e.g., Palm
             School, Waller Creek District (in concert with the Conservancy), Mexican
             American Cultural Center, Red River Cultural District, nearby historic landmarks,
             etc.)

      Cultural, Heritage, Music Tourism planning => perhaps funneled to new tourism
       marketing committee at Visit Austin. Support of robust cultural/heritage/music/local
       business tourism plans.




                                                                                       43 | P a g e
Appendix B (continued)

     Visit Austin will establish a Marketing Advisory Committee that would include local small
      business groups (i.e. Red River Cultural District and AIBA), arts and cultural
      organizations, under-represented community stakeholders, and other impacted
      stakeholders to advise and collaborate with Visit Austin on tourism marketing plans and
      diversity tourism.

     Overlay language for equity and sustainability: “With regard to all uses of the Hotel Occupancy
      Tax, equity should be considered and funding should be inclusive and reflect the diversity of
      this community, with special consideration for under-served areas and under-represented
      communities.”

      “Sustainability practices should be considered in the expansion of the CC so that
      community values and input are included in the process and into practice.” “Visit Austin
      should conduct a dialogue with community stakeholders, the Environmental Commission,
      and the Joint Sustainability Committee on the ‘greening’ and sustainability practices of
      the tourism industry.”




                                                                                         44 | P a g e
Appendix B (continued)

                                        Welcome Center Funds
Austin has many premiere tourism attractions - including our City parks. While tourists may need to
visit the city to conduct business, attend a convention, or visit family, our attractions are why visitors
jump to make the trip and why they come back and bring their friends. They are also part of the “wow
factor” that makes Austin such a coveted location for conventions, music festivals, and group travel.
The Welcome Center fund would invest in centers to improve visitor experience at specific areas
frequented by a large number of tourists by providing information and direction to visitors.

An example of such a such a center is the Visitor Education Center envisioned by the Barton Springs
Conservancy to be located in Zilker Park near Barton Springs Pool. This center would educate visitors
about the heritage, natural history, and eco-system of Barton Springs, as well as serve as an point of
orientation for other City parks.

While Welcome Centers are authorized under the same portion of Chapter 351 as Austin’s existing
Visitor Information Centers, they are conceptually distinct. While Visitor Information Centers provide
information to visitors about the whole city, Welcome Centers guide visitors around specific tourist
areas.

Recommendations
   1. Create a new fund called the Welcome Center Fund to help with the construction,
      improvement, expansion, equipping, repair, operations, and maintenance of Welcome
      Centers on City-owned land at tourist destination parks, such as Zilker Park, or other qualifying
      tourist destination areas that promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry.
   2. Solely fund the Welcome Center Fund out of the “waterfall” or “ending balance bucket” funds
      identified as part of Scenario 2B of the Convention Center Expansion. Assess costs needed
      to build Welcome Centers as opposed to establishing defined % of HOT funds.
   3. Set a maximum limit amount of the “ending balance bucket” (1/3 of remainder of waterfall after
      maximum allocation made to music) to be allocated to the Welcome Center Fund in any given
      year, aligning funding with the percentage of visitors who are tourists. In the event no
      allocation is made to the Welcome Center, those funds would remit to heritage grant, or if
      heritage grant funds aren’t being spent, could reassess.
   4. Assign administration and operation of the Welcome Center Fund to an appropriate body
      which would create a special committee composed of a broad set of stakeholders representing
      tourist destination parks and other tourist destination areas.
   5. Establish eligibility and grant administration guidelines while retaining consistency with state
      law and city code.
   6. Prior to construction funding for a Welcome Center, require funds be identified for operation
      and maintenance of the Welcome Center that will not be drawn from Tourism Promotion Fund
      or other Visit Austin funds.




                                                                                              45 | P a g e
Appendix B (continued)

Convention Center Design Amendments


The convention experience of today is more than a building; it is the authentic experience of a city. More
visitors than ever are forgoing cars in favor of a completely walkable convention experience. Austin needs a
new model for a convention center — one that adds to instead of subtracting from the vibrancy and
connectivity of its surroundings. An expansion of the convention center should minimize negative impacts
and maximize positive impacts on the city which supports it.


Therefore, we recommend:

    1. The costs of expanding the Convention Center should be met in part by integrating the expansion
        with other uses, such as street-level restaurant/retail space in order to activate the area, and
        residential or office. This would benefit the convention center and the city by ensuring that the
        surrounding area is active at times when no conventions are taking place.

    2. The city should issue a Request for Information for integrating the expansion of the Convention
        Center with other uses that would contribute to street activity and a healthy urban fabric in
        downtown’s southeast quadrant while maintaining the city’s intact street grid and valuable land and
        development on the property tax rolls for the benefit of the entire City.

    3. The Convention Center expansion should be used to repair the urban framework in the immediate
        vicinity of the convention center. Improvements should include those described in the Waller Creek
        Conservancy vision for the Convention Center area as well as the Red River Cultural District and
        pedestrian connections between the Convention Center and the Rainey Street neighborhood.

    4. Through the Waller Creek Tax Increment Financing District and/or a similar mechanism, additional
        property tax revenues from the expansion should be considered to address urgent social problems in
        this area of downtown.
Involve the Design Commission and the community in ongoing conversations about the design of the
expansion.
General Recommendations for CAD with increased funding:
Make a determination as to which pots of money should be drawn from (i.e., music-waterfall funds, cultural
arts division funds, etc.).

Consider programs such as the ones listed below under the grantee program.

    1. Marketing/Access/Outreach


                                                                                               46 | P a g e
Appendix B (continued)

          a. Website - Grants Funding page(s) more user friendly. There should be a       video        (2-3
              minutes) on the landing page that explains each grant. Each grant program also needs a video
              (2-3 minutes), and graphics explaining regulations, deadlines, details.
          b. Enhanced Community Outreach/Marketing - Dedicated interactive monthly outreach events
              to under-served communities that includes previous recipients as presenters: arts
              organizations, musicians, artists. Grant videos should be screened at these meetings.
          c. Marketing - Increased visibility in under-served community via targeted outreach campaign.
              Make materials more relevant visually and culturally            .
  2. Grant Funding
        a. Artist-as-Entrepreneur (Core Funding) - Austin musicians and artists add tremendous value to
              culture, and even further, to economic growth in the ‘Live Music Capital.’ There are artists in
              Austin building careers outside of performance on stage that can ultimately develop their
              creative ventures into larger economic engines, fueling tourism in new markets - beyond
              traditional, historic locales. These business-oriented artists need greater opportunity to
              develop their ideas, and access to increased resources. Funding preference to ideas and plans
              that stimulate growth, and develop tourism opportunities in under-served communities.
                i.     Specific funding to expand and develop individual artists that are building successful
                       arts ventures with a history of growth
                           1. Incubator ($2,000-$10,000) - business with 1-2 year history.
                               Funding delivery includes mentorship.

                           2. Growth ($10,000-$25,000) - business with 3-5 year history, proven growth,
                               and strategic plan. Funding delivery includes mentorship.
                           3. Expansion ($25,000-$100,000) - 5-7 year history, previous funding         from
                               CAD, clear community partnerships/investment. Funding delivery includes
                               mentorship.

                ii.    Artists’ receiving funding in Growth and Expansion phases must become mentors as
                       a stipulation of their participation in the program.
                iii.   Each funding level can only be received once per artist.




                                                                                                47 | P a g e
Appendix B (continued)

Sustainable Tourism Program
Recommendation: To consider that City Council request Visit Austin, formerly Austin Convention and Visitors
Bureau, review the Global Sustainable Tourism criteria for implementing in Austin. Seems that this would
simplify & define common goals initially in regards to expectations of business models.
One example: vendors agreeing to recycle in the convention center.
Other possibilities include:
A) Special consideration for the allocation of HOT funds to recipients who are requesting funds for the first
   time.
B) Inject into the tourism conversation the idea of a carrying capacity for hard and soft infrastructure.
C) Use the plan to focus more resources on transportation safety and developing new, low-emission mobility
   options.
D) To protect green space in the urban core from encroachment and to enhance the tree canopy.

Funding could come from the cultural/arts program. It could be tourism promotion, it could be historic
preservation, it could even be fashioned as a "venue" if it was linking places in a common plan that were not
geographically linked. For example, part of a sustainable tourism plan could be agri-tourism, linking our local
farms and remaining operating ranches with local breweries and farm to table restaurants with other
sustainable sites, including, for example, Austin Energy's East Austin solar farm.
The VITF encourages the City Council to ask the Joint Sustainable Committee and the Environmental Board to
be involved in the review, at a minimum.
http://www.gstcouncil.org/en/gstc-criteria-hotels-tour-operatorsdestinations/criteria-for-hotels-tour-
operators-industry.html? id=1296:global-sustainable-tourism-criteria-hotels

Other recommendations are:
A) Recommend to the City Council to use the HOT for a COA Sustainable Tourism Plan.
B) Evaluate the Austin Convention Center to determine how the existing space could be redesigned for better
   utilization of the hallways, vertical space and the roof.
C) Designate Trinity St. from Cesar Chavez to 4th St. as a low emission zone for vehicles and have the Austin
   Convention Center post no engine idling signs to existing posts.
D) Include in calculations for the actual or projected economic benefit of conventions the cost of lost hours
   in reduced mobility due to traffic congestion in the impacted area surrounding the Convention Center and
   the supporting hotels.
E) Consider increasing convention center space by constructing a new building in the Domain or other part
   of Austin in the Desired Development Zone that has existing hotel infrastructure.




                                                                                                  48 | P a g e
Appendix B (continued)


                              Funding for Heritage Grant Program


Current Use of HOT Revenues for Heritage Grant Program:
Since 1996 the City of Austin has contracted with the Austin Convention and Visitors Bureau
(ACVB) to, among other tourism-related services, administer a grant program funding projects
involving historic sites. Known as the Heritage Grants Program, the funds are provided from the
collection of Hotel Occupancy Taxes (HOT) as allowed by Chapter 351 of the Texas Tax Code. The
amount of funding allocated to the Heritage Grant Program has not been based upon a set
percentage of HOT revenues as it is with other HOT-fund programs, but as a specific amount
determined by the ACVB, and agreed upon by City Council each year.


Currently Austin’s assessed HOT rate is 15%, which is divided between the State and City, which
receive 6% and 9% respectfully. Of the 9% the City receives, approximately 20 5/7% is allocated
to ACVB for tourism promotion and the Heritage Grants Program. Recipients of Heritage grants
have included the Paramount and Stateside Theaters, the French Legation, the Contemporary,
the Elisabet Ney Museum, Pease Park, and the Austin Symphony.


Since 2009 the ACVB has distributed approximately, on average, $200,000 annually through the
Heritage Grants Program. As the table below shows that amount has equated to an average of
less than 0.50% of the total HOT tax revenues collected annually by the City. Until 2017, the
amount awarded to historic preservation projects had not increased (and some years has
decreased), while the City’s HOT revenues have increased by nearly 70%.


In 2017, City Council directed the ACVB to set aside $500,000 toward the Heritage Grants
Program. Additionally, Council allocated $1,000,000 to the Parks and Recreation Department for
use on Chapter 351-eligible historic restoration projects located within parks. Through a diligent
planning process, PARD decided to allocate the funds for projects at the Elisabet Ney Museum,
the O Henry Museum, the Oakwood Cemetery Chapel, and Mayfield Park.




                                                                                       49 | P a g e
Appendix B (continued)



  Fiscal    HOT Revenues   Convention      Convention    ACVB Tourism   Cultural Arts      Heritage
  Year                       Center          Center      & Promo Fund      Grants           Grants
                 (9%
                                                                                           Program
             assessment)     Ch. 334        Ch. 351         Ch. 351       Ch. 351
                                                                                            grants
                           (2% of total)   (64 2/7% of    (20 5/7% of   (15% of 7%)
                                                                                           awarded
                                               7%)            7%)


  2011       $46,727,283   $10,383,841     $23,363,641    $7,528,284    $5,451,516      Data not avail.
                                                                                        to committee


  2012       $50,959,067   $11,324,237     $25,479,534    $8,210,072    $5,945,225        $195,988
                                                                                         (.49% of 7%)


  2013       $59,549,080   $13,233,129     $29,774,540    $9,594,018    $6,947,393        $115,260
                                                                                         (.25% of 7%)


  2014       $67,999,894   $15,111,088     $33,999,947    $10,955,538   $7,933,321        $137,876
                                                                                         (.26% of 7%)


  2015       $79,184,384   $17,596,530     $39,592,192    $12,757,484   $9,238,178        $117,500
                                                                                         (.19% of 7%)


  2016       $87,529,652   $19,451,034     $43,764,826    $14,101,999   $10,211,793       $212,075
                                                                                         (.31% of 7%)

From data.austintexas.gov and data distributed to VITF.


Allowable Use of HOT Taxes Per Chapter 351 of Texas Tax Code:
Per Section 351.101 of the Texas Tax Code revenue from Hotel Occupancy Taxes may be used to
promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry, for purposes that include:


   “5) historical restoration and preservation projects or activities or advertising and
   conducting solicitations and promotional programs to encourage tourists and
   convention delegates to visit preserved historic sites or museums:
     (A)     at or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities or visitor
           information centers; or


                                                                                          50 | P a g e
Appendix B (continued)

     (B) located elsewhere in the municipality or its vicinity that would be frequented by
         tourists and convention delegates;”


Cities may delegate management of funds (e.g. for a grant program) to another governmental
entity or private organization and may use tax revenues to pay for administrative expenses
related to activities funded by HOT.


ACVB Heritage Grant Program:
The City of Austin contracts with the ACVB to market Austin as a premier travel destination, and
administer the Heritage Grant Program. According to the ACVB the purpose of the grant program
is to promote tourism through the preservation, restoration, and rehabilitation of historic sites
and properties. In 2006 the City and ACVB established the following set of general eligibility
requirements for the grant program:


   1. Eligible properties:
      a. Properties owned or leased by a governmental or non-profit entity.
      b. Properties designated as City of Austin Landmark, Recorded Texas Historic Landmark,
          State Antiquities Landmark, or on the National Register of Historic Places, as well as
          those listed as contributing to a National Register or Local Historic District.
      c. Properties that are “tourism” ready with regular open hours and accessible to hotels
          for out-of-town travelers, and that can document promotional advertising to tourists.

   2. Eligible projects include exterior work for facade or exterior restoration and rehabilitation
      of sites including buildings, accessory structures and grounds.


   3. Applicants must provide at least a 50% match in the form of cash or donated services or
      goods.


   4. Maximum grant amount is $58,000 as of 2017 (maximum amount was previously
      $47,000).


   5. Payment of grant funds is made after the work is complete. Scheduled payments may be
      approved on a case-by-case basis.


   6. Award recipients must obtain 3 bids for work.


                                                                                       51 | P a g e
Appendix B (continued)



   7. Repayment of all grant funds is required if the following occurs within 3 years after
      completion of work:
       a. Property is conveyed to a private, for-profit owner.
       b. Applicant fails to maintain the property as required by City code.
       c. Historic zoning or designation is removed.
       d. Work is not completed in accordance with preservation agreement.
       e. Applicant fails to provide proof of insurance annually.


The amount of funding ACVB makes available each year has averaged $200,000, yet most years
less than this amount has been awarded to applicants. Additionally, the same few applicants have
submitted for funding each year.


Citizens and organizations that have attended VITF meetings have expressed a desire for changes
to the grant program and its guidelines to expand the type and number of projects receiving this
funding.


Issues That May Be Limiting Use of the Heritage Grant Program:
   1. Eligible entities being unaware of the program.

   2. Rules and guidelines that are too restrictive to encourage use including:
         a. Restricted only to non-profit and public entities.
         b. Requiring applicants to provide detailed documentation on visitor information
             prior to funding and for two years after funding received.
         c. Funding limited to work on façade or exterior of buildings.
         d. Requiring three bids for funded work.
         e. Funding provided on a reimbursement method after 100% of work complete.
         f. Grants amounts being too modest to encourage entities to submit applications.


Need for Funding for Historic Resources on Parks & Recreation Department Land:
The Parks and Recreation Department (PARD) has identified horizon projects for use of future
HOT funds on PARD properties. These projects include the restoration of the Barton Springs
Bathhouse, Phase II of the O Henry Museum, Elisabet Ney Museum, and Mayfield Parks projects,
as well as projects in the downtown historic squares and the Tejano Trail. Additionally, there are
many other historic sites and objects on PARD land that could benefit from funding. Having


                                                                                      52 | P a g e
Appendix B (continued)

dedicated future funding would allow larger multi-phased projects without fear of leaving later
phases uncompleted, and will result in economic efficiency in carrying out projects.




Potential Economic Impacts of Funding Heritage Tourism and Historic Preservation Projects
Numerous studies conducted across the United States have shown that heritage tourism and
historic preservation activities provide communities with significant economic benefits. The
report “Economic Impact of Historic Preservation in Texas”, commissioned by the Texas Historical
Commission in 2015, and carried out by University of Texas and Rutgers University, found that
Texas heritage attracts tourists, creates jobs, attracts reinvestment, and brings economic vitality
to our communities. In fact, more than 10.5% of all travel in Texas is heritage-related and results
in $2.25 billion in spending each year. Heritage day and overnight travelers spend on average
over $175 per day, while non-heritage travelers spend less than $145 per day. Heritage travelers
also stay longer resulting in more “heads in beds”, and greater HOT revenues. Heritage tourism
alone created more than 54,000 jobs in Texas in 2013. It also creates jobs in retail and service
sectors, and the physical work on historic properties creates jobs in architecture, engineering and
construction – and these tend to be more skilled, and higher paid jobs than found in new
construction. In 2013, Texas realized $772 million in private and public historic rehabilitation
investment – having a significant impact on our economy.


Comments From VITF Members re. Funding for Historic Preservation:
The following comments were generated by the VITF members. In many cases a single comment
below reflects comments provided by multiple members.
   ● Revise criteria and guidelines for Heritage Grants.
   ● Provide transparent process for Heritage Grants program.
   ● Move administration of the Heritage Grants program to an entity whose mission is historic
     preservation.
   ● Allow private venues within historic entertainment and cultural districts to be eligible for
     funding through the Heritage Grant program.
   ● Increase annual amount allocated to Heritage Grant program to be closer to State cap.
   ● Fund improvements to downtown sites through new heritage tourism and/or parks
     tourism funding.

Recommendations from VITF for Funding a Grant Program for Historic Preservation and
Heritage-Related Projects:



                                                                                       53 | P a g e
Appendix B (continued)

  1. Transfer administration of the Historic Preservation and Heritage Grant program from the
     ACVB to a non-profit or City department with an advisory board composed of a broad and
     inclusive set of stakeholders representing a variety of historic preservation, cultural
     heritage, and tourism interests. Look to other grant programs as a model including the
     Texas Historical Commission’s Texas Preservation Trust Fund (TPTF), and History
     Colorado’s State Historical Fund (SHF).

  2. Maintain percentage funding levels from HOT revenues for the Cultural Arts grant
     program and ACVB Tourism Promotion Fund.

  3. Revise eligibility and grant administration guidelines while retaining consistency with
     State law and City Code:
         a. Remove the requirement that three bids be received for all work. For much
             historic preservation-related restoration and rehabilitation work there may not be
             three contractors or tradespeople available locally with the skills and experience
             to carry out specialized work, and for multi-phase work it can be more efficient to
             contract with the same architects and tradespeople as in earlier phases.
         b. Eliminate the cap on the maximum amount for individual grants. This serves
             multiple purposes: 1) increases efficiency for grant recipients by reducing the time
             spent on grant-writing; 2) allows funds to be used on higher impact projects with
             larger budget needs; 3) reduces the number of times an individual property owner
             has to return to the grant program for funding, 4) allows for large
             restoration/rehabilitation projects to be completed in a more timely and cost-
             efficient manner.
         c. Allow for funding of privately-owned properties that are regularly open to the
             public (e.g. commercial properties). Other publicly-funded grant programs
             provide funding to privately-owned properties including the TPTF and SHF
             programs. Establish grant scoring criteria and guidelines that put a higher burden
             on private, commercial grant recipients than on non-profit and public recipients.
             The funding can serve as an incentive for property owners in areas such as East
             Sixth Street, or the Red River District to make improvements to their historic
             buildings that make them more attractive to tourists, alleviates development
             pressures on those historic resources, and also benefits the community.

             If market factors in the future make low-interest loans more attractive to
             privately-owned, commercial properties, strongly encourage that City Council
             consider establishing a loan program in lieu of grants for these types of projects.

         d. Establish grant scoring criteria to favor properties owned by public and non-profit
            entities, projects that impact culturally-significant historic sites that have been
            under-represented, and entertainment and cultural districts that have the

                                                                                     54 | P a g e
Appendix B (continued)

             capacity to attract a more diverse tourist audience.
          e. Establish grant scoring criteria to encourage funding to assist sites to be more
             “visitor-ready”, or that attract tourists to areas that haven’t traditionally served
             tourists. This can diversify Austin’s tourism options and better tell all the stories
             of our community’s heritage.
          f. Expand the type of projects eligible for funding to include interior work, building
             systems, interpretive signage, etc.
          g. Look to other grant programs as a model for eligible scopes of work, selection
             processes, and restrictions based upon the type of grant recipient including the
             TPTF and SHF.
          h. Remove any caps on the amount of grant funds that can be provided toward a
             specific site or total project cost at a site.

Recommendations from VITF Regarding Funding:
   1. Establish      % of revenue from HOT associated with the expansion of the Austin
      Convention Center (plan 2b) or from a Tourism Public Improvement District to be
      dedicated to a Historic Preservation and Heritage Grant Program.

   2. Prior to any expansion of the HOT tax due to ACC or TPID, continue to allocate $1.5 million
      to a Historic Preservation and Heritage Grant Program. Until ACC expansion is creating
      additional 2 percent, would come out of Tourism Promotion, but if/when expansion
      and/or TPID approved, funds would come from waterfall dollars.




                                                                                      55 | P a g e
Appendix B (continued)

                                  Additional Funding for Music

The Austin Convention Center is to expand, based on proposed scenario 2B. Under this proposed
expansion, Austin City Council would implement a 2% increase in HOT based on State Chapter
351. The total HOT tax collected from applicable revenues for Austin properties would be 17%
($0.17) of which the following allocations are identified:

   •   $0.06 State of Texas
   •   $0.02 Existing Chpt.334 Venue Tax – Convention Center Expansion Debt
       Service
   •   $0.0105 Cultural Arts
   •   $0.0145 ACVB
   •   $.045 Austin Convention Center
   •   $0.02 New CHPT 351 funding to Austin Convention Center debt service

ACCD’s financial model has identified available funds through excesses built into their forecasted
budget needs stated to be $6.4MM in available funds.

Austin’s music economy and entertainment districts have numerous shortfalls as outlined in the
music census and the resultant omnibus resolution. The value of the music industry in Austin,
specifically live music, to tourism cannot be overstated. If the Convention Center is to expand,
and Hotel Occupancy Taxes are to increase there must be consideration for the Music Industry
made within applicable uses.

From this follows:

   -   A recommendation to allocate sustainable funding from annual excesses, as identified in the
       ACCD Financing model, towards the identified needs of Music Infrastructure and Historical
       Preservation. Funds would be split between Music Infrastructure and Historic Preservation not
       to fall below 80% of the ending CIP & Annual end balance as identified in funding model 2B.

   -   A recommendation that a body of governmental and non-governmental representatives, to be
       identified, be formed in order to establish criteria and vet proposals relating to the dispersal of
       these funds for allowable uses.

   -   A recommendation to form or identify a non-profit body or bodies to manage these funds,
       separate from the ACVB, Cultural Arts or the Austin Convention Center.

   -   A recommendation to transfer the management of the existing Heritage Grant program and
       funding to the new management body.

These recommendations aim to create a sustainable funding model to support the needs of
Austin’s cultural and community assets as well as to create an accessible, needs-based approach
to allocating funds for these assets moving forward. Music Infrastructure funding in these
recommendations is separate from Music Marketing (which should still be part of the ACVB
directive) or Cultural Arts funding for music programming.




                                                                                             56 | P a g e
